Battleship Potemkin

Scenario and script by Sergei Eisenstein



PART ONE: MEN AND MAGGOTS

A huge wave breaks violently over the jetty, raising a sparkling fountain of 
spray, and 

	flows turbulently over the stones on the shore. 

Wave after wave breaks over the jetty, ever more violently, and 

	flows over the stones on the shore, ever more turbulently. The raging sea 
boils.

[TITLE:] REVOLUTION MEANS WAR. THIS -- THIS IS THE ONE LAWFUL, REASONABLE AND 
JUST, TRULY GREAT WAR OF ALL THE WARS THAT HISTORY HAS KNOWN. IN RUSSIA THIS 
WAR HAS BEEN DECLARED AND BEGUN 	"  
[Lenin: Collected Works, Vol. 9, p. 212.]

Its stark, geometrical beauty distinguishing it, a powerful battleship lies 
in the anchorage.

On the battleship, a sailor ascends a ladder. He is quickly approached by 
another.

[TITLE:] THE SAILORS MATYUSHENKO AND VAKULINCHUK	

Matyushenko speaks urgently to Vakulinchuk:

[TITLE:] 'We, the sailors of the Potemkin, must support the workers, our 
brothers, and must stand in the front ranks of the revolution.'

Vakulinchuk answers him in agitation and quickly descends the ladder.

By night, the silhouette of the battleship stands out starkly and 
majestically in the anchorage.

[TITLE:] THE OFF-DUTY WATCH IN DEEP SLEEP	

The lower deck: packed like sardines in a tin, the sleeping sailors lie in 
canvas hammocks.

They sleep in uncomfortable positions and breathe noisily. One sleeping sailor, 

	another, 

	a third, 

	a fourth, 

	a fifth.

A fat boatswain with a brutal face descends the ladder into the lower deck 
and looks with malice at 

	the sleeping sailors.

He threads his way through the canvas hammocks and 

	mistrustfully surveys 

	the sleeping sailors. He allows his gaze to rest 

	on one of the sleeping men.

Continuing to thread his way through the canvas hammocks, 

	he shifts his gaze quickly from one sleeping sailor to another.

[TITLE:] VIGILANT, BUT CLUMSY 	

Unexpectedly, he slips and almost falls.

[TITLE:] HE VENTS HIS ANGER ON A YOUNG MAN	

Furiously, the boatswain raises his arm and 

	lashes the naked back of a young sailor with his pipechain.

The young sailor awakens, looks uncomprehendingly at the boatswain 

	and speaks out in surprise.

The boatswain looks impudently at the young sailor and plays with the chain.

The young sailor, stiff with rage and resentment, stares hotly

	at the departing boatswain, 

	turns over with hatred, 

	and throws his face violently against his pillow. 

The muscles of his naked back twitch.

[TITLE:] INDIGNANTLY	

His neighbor lays a sympathetic hand on his shoulder and points out to him 
the figure of Vakulinchuk on one side.

[TITLE:] VAKULINCHUK	

Amidst the canvas hammocks, naked to the waist, Vakulinchuk, holding a 
leaflet in his hand, speaks with passion and resolution to the sailors:

[TITLE:] 'Comrades, the time has come when we must speak out.' 

Vakulinchuk's whole body breathes hatred. The sailors awaken 

	one by one.

Vakulinchuk turns to the sailors with the appeal: 

[TITLE:] 'What are we waiting for? All Russia has risen. Are we to be the last?'

He continues his speech passionately.

A sailor with a sickly face assents to everything he says, 

	and a sailor with a big moustache impatiently interrupts him and demands 
the beginning, of action.

Again, the sailor with the sickly face utters a few fighting words.

Firmly and manfully, Vakulinchuk calls for battle. Again, the sailor with the 
big moustache demands the beginning of action.

All the sailors listen with attention and fellow-feeling to the words of 
Vakulinchuk.

[TITLE:] MORNING	

A gloomy-looking officer, his hands in his pockets, walks along the deck. 
Suddenly he notices that

	a crowd of sailors have gathered around a carcass of meat.

The crowd of sailors grows larger

	and larger.

A senior officer with a proud, weakly aristocratic face steps out of a cabin, 
and, 

	pompously, his hands clasped behind his back, begins to walk along the 
deck, 

	but he soon stops and 

	looks contemptuously 

	at the sailors surging around the carcass of meat.

The eyes of the senior officer fill with malice when he notices the figure of 
Vakulinchuk walking past the carcass of meat. 

The crowd of sailors excitedly inspect the carcass of meat. 

The senior officer moves away and 

	soon reappears on the upper deck, above the heads of the sailors.

The legs of the approaching senior officer draw near to the handrail.

The senior officer looks at the sailors with such menace that

	they timidly press closer to one another. The legs of the officer turn 
away.

The senior officer goes off, and the crowd of sailors surges with ever-
increasing movement.

[TITLE:] 'We've had enough of eating rotten meat!'

Again, the faces of the sailors turn with indignation to inspect the carcass 
of rotten meat. 

The indignation of the sailors grows. 

[TITLE:] 'A dog wouldn't eat it!'

Again and again, the faces of the sailors turn to inspect the carcass of 
rotten meat.

The crowd of sailors around the carcass bubbles like a whirlpool.

The senior officer returns -- with the ship's surgeon, a small short-sighted 
man, his courage comically mustered. 

With an authoritative expression, the surgeon examines and sniffs at the 
carcass of rotten meat, 

	turning it over squeamishly.

Vakulinchuk, standing in front of the sailors, indignantly points out the 
rotten meat to the surgeon.

[TITLE:] SHIP'S SURGEON SMIRNOV	

The surgeon heatedly rebuts Vakulinchuk, 

	but Vakulinchuk says bitterly: 

[TITLE:] 'It's so high it could walk overboard!' 

Vakulinchuk looks angrily at the surgeon.

The surgeon slowly and importantly removes his pince-nez, 

	folds its two eye-pieces together, 

	raises them to his eye, 

	and examines the meat through the folded eye-pieces of his pince-nez.

The meat is visibly infested with maggots.

However, the surgeon does not agree with Vakulinchuk that the meat is rotten, 

	and agitatedly waves his pince-nez about. 

[TITLE:] 'These are not maggots.'

Through the folded eye-pieces of the surgeon's pince-nez, it is evident that
the meat is swarming with large maggots. 

Vakulinchuk and the sailors look with fury at the heartless, typically 
Tsarist official, as loathsome himself as a maggot.

The surgeon, having assumed an air of indifference, replaces his pince-nez 
and, rolling his eyes, says sharply and dryly to the sailors: 

[TITLE:] 'They are the dead larvae of flies.  They can be washed off with 
vinegar.'

He speaks peremptorily, cutting the air with his forefinger. 

Then, carefully and fastidiously, he raises the end of the carcass and turns 
to the senior officer for support. 

He swings the end of the carcass.

The senior officer, interesting himself in the meat, also raises the end of 
the carcass -- carefully and fastidiously.

Vakulinchuk knocks the end of the carcass out of the surgeon's hand and says 
angrily to him:

[TITLE:] 'Russian prisoners-of-war in Japan eat better than us.' 

	and, pointing at the rotten, maggoty meat, he shouts: 

[TITLE:] 'We've had enough of eating rotten meat!' 

The surgeon walks away hurriedly, 

	trying to pacify the sailors.

The senior officer also tries to soothe the sailors, but he quickly 

	joins the enraged surgeon.

The surgeon, breaking into a violent frenzy, shouts: 

[TITLE:] 'The meat is good. There's nothing more to be said.' 

Continuing to shout angrily, he stands very erect, 

	his hands by the side of his uniform, but, 

	suddenly, from fear, his head sinks deeply into his shoulders when he sees 

	the sailors, Vakulinchuk at their head, moving quickly and boldly forwards.

Helplessly, the surgeon jerks up his shoulders, and looks for assistance to 
the senior officer, 

	who maintains a proud and majestic pose. 

Frightened, the surgeon 

	scurries round the back of the senior officer. The senior officer, frozen 
in his proud and majestic pose, watches contemptuously 

	as the sailors approach.

The senior officer calmly and slowly turns his back on them, 

	and moves further away with the surgeon. 

Confidently, the sailors follow them.

The senior officer and the surgeon depart quickly, 

	and the sailors drop back.

The sailors continue to crowd around the carcass of meat. 

A malicious, fierce-faced officer appears and 

	begins to shout at the sailors.

[TITLE:] SENIOR OFFICER GILYAROVSKY 	

Officer Gilyarovsky roughly disperses the crowd of sailors. 

Furiously, he swears at them and 

	shouts.

Then he goes up to the boatswain, who proceeds himself to drive the sailors 
away from the carcass of meat. 

A fat cook sniffs squeamishly at the carcass of rotten, maggoty meat and 
bears it off.

In the ship's galley, he begins 

	to hack at the carcass with an axe.

Sailors indignantly approach and tell him that the meat is rotten, but he 
does not stop hacking at the carcass. 

More sailors approach and try to prevent him from hacking at the rotten meat.

The axe hacks the carcass into pieces.

The sailors try to tear the rotten meat from him, but he swears at them and 

	continues his work.

The axe hacks the carcass into pieces.




On deck, the muzzle of a cannon is being cleaned. 

Seated on the muzzle, a sailor cleans it.

A cleaning-rod is pushed down the muzzle of the cannon. 

Two sailors polish a copper capstan.

Again, a cleaning-rod is pushed down the muzzle of the cannon.

The sailor on the muzzle withdraws the cleaning-rod. 

Two sailors polish a copper capstan. 

Two sailors polish some copper engine-parts. 

A third pair of sailors clean a chain. 

Two sailors polish a copper capstan.

One of the two sailors cleaning the chain stops work and begins to converse 
with his comrade.

Borshch from the rotten meat bubbles in a cauldron. In the ship's mess a 
detachment of sailors begin

	to let down the tables which hang by ropes from the ceiling.

One file of sailors leaves the ship's mess, 

	and, then, another.

Borshch from the rotten meat bubbles in a cauldron. 

The fat boatswain with the brutal face enters, playing with his pipe-chain,

	 and walks between the empty tables which swing rhythmically on ropes from 
the ceiling, and, 

	with an important air, he stops and gives his orders. 

Some sailors begin to arrange tureens on the tables. 

The tables with the tureens upon them swing rhythmically on ropes from the 
ceiling.

Borshch from the rotten meat bubbles in a cauldron. 

Some sailors can be seen through a grating.

A group of sailors sit by the edge of one side of the battleship. 

One of them, holding a dried fish in his hand, talks indignantly.

Another cuts off a piece of black bread. 

The sailor with the fish is full of anger and hatred.

[TITLE:] IMPOTENT FURY SWEEPS OVER THE GROUP OF SAILORS	

The sailor with the fish fits the head of it beneath a ring on the deck and 

	forcefully 

	tears it off.

Some sailors can be seen through a grating. 

A pile of salt on a rag and a hunk of black bread. 

One young sailor snaps off a piece of black bread and chews it for his dinner.

Mugs are filled with fresh water from taps.

Near the pile of salt on the rag and the hunk of black bread -- a mug of 
water.

One young sailor chews, and drinks water from the mug.

As soon as the young sailor finishes drinking, he sprinkles salt on the 
bread, and his neighbor takes the mug and drinks. 

Senior officer Gilyarovsky descends the ladder into the ship's mess.

Several sailors stand to attention, but do not salute him. 

A young sailor salutes, and 

	Gilyarovsky carelessly waves his hand.

Frowning at Gilyarovsky, the young sailor lowers his hand. 

A wicked expression on his face, Gilyarovsky appears to consider something.

The sailors do not meet his eyes and 

	quickly go out, one 

	after another.

A smile of malicious triumph appears on Gilyarovsky's face. He turns sharply 
and 

	moves rapidly between the tables.

The tables with the tureens upon them swing rhythmically on ropes from the 
ceiling.

Gilyarovsky stops by a cupboard, opens the door of it, and inclines his head.

The tables with the tureens upon them swing rhythmically on ropes from the 
ceiling.

Gilyarovsky shakes his head significantly.

A table laid with empty tureens and with black bread upon it swings 
rhythmically on ropes from the ceiling. 

Indignant, Gilyarovsky 

	quickly walks out of the ship's mess.

[TITLE:] THE SHIP'S STORE 	

Some sailors stand by the little window of the ship's store, buying food. 

In the window 

	tins of food 

	appear fleetingly 

	in the hands of the sailors.

One of the sailors sees Gilyarovsky approaching. 

Gilyarovsky looks wickedly 

	at the sailors.

His gaze fixes tensely upon them, but he turns quickly and departs.

The sailors follow Gilyarovsky with their eyes. When he is no longer in 
sight, they continue 

	to buy food.

On the captain's bridge, the senior officer with the weakly aristocratic face 
looks through his binoculars. Gilyarovsky goes up to him and reports on the 
behavior of the sailors. Together, they descend the ladder, 

	enter the ship's mess,

	and walk between the suspended tables, 

	considering the situation which has developed. 

A table laid with empty tureens and with black bread upon it swings 
rhythmically on ropes from the ceiling. 

The two senior officers, conversing all the while, 

	begin 

	to ascend 

	the ladder.

The sailors talk uneasily among themselves.

The senior officer enters the room next to the ship's galley and 

	gives orders to the cook.

The cook opens the door to the galley, and the cooking range in the galley 
becomes visible, 

	and the saucepans, 

	and the other cook at work.

The senior officer completes his orders to the first cook. 

The second cook walks out of the galley, salutes and 

	reports to the senior officer.

The senior officer angrily upbraids the first cook. 

When the second cook has reported, 

	the senior officer departs. 

A young sailor is washing some plates,

	 and another, painstakingly, dries them. 

Dinner for the 'gentlemen officers' is being prepared. 

The washing and the drying of plates goes on. 

With a characteristic movement, the young sailor washing the plates wipes his 
nose with his hand. 

He continues to wash the plates, 

	a second sailor -- to lay the table for dinner, 

	the third -- painstakingly to dry the plates.

The young sailor washing the plates continues to hand them to 

	the other young sailor who, painstakingly, dries them. 

The young sailor washes an earthenware plate, on the rim of which is a 
circular inscription. 

He is whistling, 

	 but the inscription on the plate attracts his attention. 

He leans his head towards the plate and 

	begins slowly to turn it in his hands. 

Moving his head from one side to the other, 

	he reads the circular inscription: 

[TITLE:] 'Give us this day	' 

	and he repeats these words aloud.

Continuing to revolve the plate in his hands, he reads further from the 
inscription on its rim: 

[TITLE:] '	 our daily bread.' 

His face breaks into a scowl. 

He begins carefully to examine 

	the inscription on the plate.

Involuntarily repeating the words aloud, he looks with loathing at 

	the inscription on the plate, 

	and becomes thoughtful.

Revolving the plate rapidly in his hands, 

	he looks intently at it and 

	bitterly pronounces the words of the inscription. 

He raises the plate high and, 

	having swept his hands down 

	and up,

	he hurls it 

	violently 

	down 

	and smashes it to pieces against the table. 

The young sailor straightens up and sees that

	the covers on the table for the dinner of the 'gentlemen officers' have 
been upset.




PART TWO: DRAMA ON THE QUARTER-DECK

The bugle sounds 

	shrilly and uneasily.

Seen from above -- past the muzzles of the cannons menacingly overhanging -- 
the sailors quickly fill the quarter-deck, forming themselves in double file 
along either side of the deck. At the prow of the battleship the flag of St. 
Andrew flutters in the wind.

The bugler sounds his call.

The petty officers arrange themselves in single file in front of the sailors.

A group of officers fall in behind the hatch in the middle of the deck.

[TITLE:] COMMANDER GOLIKOV 	

From the hatch appears the figure of Commander Golikov, resolutely ascending 
the ladder. 

The officers salute him.

Commander Golikov steps onto the deck and 

	salutes.

He walks up to a capstan and 

	stands upon it.

The sailors in their ranks stand stiffly to attention, 

	and so do the petty officers. 

Nobody stirs. The muzzles of the cannons hang menacingly over the ranks.

Commander Golikov, one hand by the side of his frock-coat, the other behind 
his back, looks threateningly round the motionless rows of sailors. 

The officers are at the salute.

Restraining his fury, Commander Golikov orders: 

[TITLE:] 'Those satisfied with the borshch --'

A pause.

[TITLE:] '-- two paces forward!' 

He raises an admonishing hand.

A number of petty officers step hesitantly forward.

[TITLE:] THE PETTY OFFICERS 	

The petty officers who have kept rank falter. After a while, one of them 
takes two steps forward. The officers stand motionless, at the salute.

Only two of the petty officers have kept rank.

	Whereupon, two of the sailors break rank and step forward. 

Commander Golikov, one hand by the side of his frock-coat, the other behind 
his back, looks threateningly about him. 

A young petty officer, not knowing what to do, mechanically fingers the strap 
running over his shoulder.

The muzzles of the cannons hang menacingly over a motionless rank of sailors.

The senior petty officer looks apprehensively at the men who have not moved. 

[TITLE:] 'Come on!' 

The young petty officer, not knowing what to do, mechanically fingers the 
strap running over his shoulder. 

Enraged, Commander Golikov shouts: 

[TITLE:] 'Hang the rest on the yard-arm!' 

	and he points 

	at the mast.

A young officer with a small moustache, turning his eyes in the direction of 
the mast, can hardly repress a smile. 

The words of the Commander strike terror in the hearts of the sailors.

They turn their heads in the direction of the mast. 

Before the eyes of one old sailor, there begins to swim 

	the vision of the sailors hanging on the yard-arm. 

The old sailor looks fearfully in the direction of the mast. 

The two petty officers turn their eyes towards

	the mast.

One of the petty officers turns towards the other with a nervous smile.

Commander Golikov shakes his hand threateningly. 

The tensely smiling face of the petty officer immediately becomes serious.

Commander Golikov fixes his eyes ominously on the sailors. 

The petty officer is stiff with fright. 

Commander Golikov shouts: 

[TITLE:] 'Call out the guard!'

	and does not remove his gaze from the sailors. 

Seen from above -- past the muzzles of the cannons menacingly overhanging -- 
a sailor breaks rank and quickly runs past the gun-turret.

[TITLE:] MATYUSHENKO BREAKS RANK AND EDGES TOWARDS THE GUN-TURRET	

Matyushenko exhorts the sailors.

The sailor returns and runs quickly up to the Commander. 

Matyushenko says to the sailors: 

[TITLE:] 'To the turret ', 

	and he points at the gun-turret.

The sailors convey the message one to another: 

[TITLE:] 'To the turret.'

Matyushenko directs the sailors: 

[TITLE:] 'To the turret.'

The sailors quickly convey Matyushenko's direction one to another.

The sailors in rank, their faces gloomy, stand motionless. 

Seen from above -- past the muzzles of the cannons menacingly overhanging -- 
the armed guard, dressed in black uniforms, move past the gun-turret. 

Two evil-faced officers converse agitatedly.

Beneath the muzzles of the cannons menacingly overhanging, past the ranks of 
sailors, the guard move, rifles in hand.

The officers exchange glances with one another significantly. 

The guard pass by the ranks of sailors 

	and fail into line in front of the Commander. 

Matyushenko turns to the sailors: 

[TITLE:] 'Lads	' 

He shouts:

[TITLE:] 'It is time!'

The sailors break rank and, 

	quickly, 

	according to Matyushenko's direction, 

	race towards 

	the gun-turret.

[TITLE:] MOST OF THE SAILORS ARE GATHERED BY THE GUN-TURRET	

Seen from above -- past the muzzles of the cannons menacingly overhanging -- 
most of the sailors have gathered by the gun-turret, 

	 and only a small knot of sailors remain on the prow of the battleship.

From this knot of sailors, a number detach themselves and run towards the 
gun-turret.

Senior officer Gilyarovsky frowns viciously. 

The crowd of sailors is agitated.

Gilyarovsky, raising his hand, shouts at the sailors remaining on the prow of 
the battleship: 

[TITLE:] 'Stop! Into rank!' 

The sailors remaining on the prow of the battleship look in terror 

	at the infuriated Gilyarovsky, and 

	try to run towards the gun-turret, but they are driven back by the 
officers.

The captain of the guard awaits the orders of the Commander.

[TITLE:] THEY TRY TO MAKE THEIR WAY THROUGH THE ADMIRAL'S HATCH 	

Some of the sailors remaining on the prow of the battleship advance towards 
the admiral's hatch. 

Commander Golikov shouts at them in fury: 

[TITLE:] 'Back, you villains! This is no way for you!' 

	and he springs at the sailors with his fists, 

	catches one of them, and 

	hurls him at the feet of the other sailors, and then 

	catches another.

The sailors raise their fallen comrade.

Commander Golikov shouts at the sailors in fury: 

[TITLE:] 'I'll shoot you like dogs!' 

	and he shakes his fist threateningly. 

The sailor looks bitterly at him and 

	rejoins his comrades. 

Senior officer Gilyarovsky 

	commands the guard to turn about towards the sailors remaining on the prow 
of the battleship, 

	climbs up onto the capstan, 

	and, with a triumphant smirk, orders: 

[TITLE:] 'Cover them with a tarpaulin!' 

Three petty officers break rank. 

[TITLE:] 'Aye, aye, sir.'

They come to a halt, 

	salute, 

	then turn and 

	go back, one 

	after another. Two more petty officers follow them. 

A triumphant smirk on his lips, Gilyarovsky twirls his moustache.

The petty officers take hold of a tarpaulin. 

Gilyarovsky continues to twirl his moustache. 

The petty officers 

	carry the tarpaulin 

	past the guard. One of the sailors in the guard turns his head and looks 
dejectedly at the tarpaulin.

The petty officers continue to carry the tarpaulin past the guard.

The sailor in the guard who had looked at the tarpaulin turns his head back 
and stands upright.

The petty officers carry the tarpaulin past the guard. 

The sailor in the guard dejectedly lowers his head. 

The petty officers with the tarpaulin draw close to the sailors remaining on 
the prow of the battleship, throw the tarpaulin down on to the deck and begin 
to unroll it.

The sailors gathered by the gun-turret follow tensely the actions of the 
petty officers and the guard. 

[TITLE:] 'Cover them!' 

The petty officers unroll 

	the tarpaulin.

The knot of sailors remaining on the prow of the battleship press themselves 
in terror against the handrail of the deck, covering their faces with their 
hands. 

The petty officers raise 

	the tarpaulin 

	and cover the sailors with it. 

The tarpaulin 

	covers the sailors.

The guard stand motionless, rifles at ease. 

An officer approaches. 

[TITLE:] 'Attention!' 

The file of petty officers 

	and the officers 

	brace themselves.

The sailors in the guard stiffen.

The guard stand in front of the knot of sailors covered with the tarpaulin.
Gilyarovsky runs up to the guard. 

The muzzles of the cannons look menacingly down. 

The reflection of the battleship dances on the waves. 

The ship's priest appears on the deck and raises his hands to the sky.

[TITLE:] 'Lord, let these sinners understand.'

Some of the sailors covered with the tarpaulin fall to their knees. 

The priest raises his cross and speaks. 

Senior officer Gilyarovsky orders: 

[TITLE:] 'At the tarpaulin -- aim!' 

The sailors in the guard load, and 

	raise their rifles 

	to the shoulder.

The sailors in the guard consider with horror the imminent shooting of the 
knot of sailors covered with the tarpaulin and 

	lower their heads.

Several of the sailors covered with the tarpaulin are on their knees.

The heads of the sailors in the guard are dejectedly lowered, but, 

	on the command, 

	the sailors raise their rifles to the shoulder. 

Three officers look on tensely.

The priest, counting off the seconds, mechanically slaps his cross against 
his palm 

	several times. 

The face of a young petty officer twitches with fear. Tormentedly counting 
off the tense seconds, he strokes the knife in his belt.

Gilyarovsky shouts furiously.

Almost all the sailors covered with the tarpaulin have fallen to their knees.

Standing in a row, the officers are motionless. 

The sailors in the guard level the muzzles of their rifles 

	and aim at the knot of sailors covered with the tarpaulin. 

The sailors standing near the gun-turret look on with terror 

	as the guard aim their rifles at the knot of sailors covered with the 
tarpaulin.

The priest slaps his cross several times more against his palm.

It is as if time had stopped 	 the deathly hush before the storm.

On a life-belt, the clear inscription Prince Potemkin Tavrichesky.

The prow of the battleship -- with a Tsarist eagle. 

The bugler holds his bugle in readiness.

The tension is at its peak. Vakulinchuk makes a decisive movement.

[TITLE:] VAKULINCHUK DECIDES 	

Gilyarovsky orders the guard:

[TITLE:] 'Fire!'

Vakulinchuk shouts to the guard: 

[TITLE:] 'Brothers!' 

With horror on his face, he again shouts to the guard: 

[TITLE:] 'Who are you shooting at?' 

A sailor in the guard continues to take aim.

[TITLE:] THE RIFLES WAVER 	

Several sailors in the guard lower their rifles. The incident has reached 
crisis point.

Gilyarovsky, raising his fists, shouts at the guard in fury: 

[TITLE:] 'Shoot!' 

One after another, the sailors in the guard lower their rifles. 

One of the sailors in the guard does not know what to do. 

[TITLE:] 'Shoot!' 

His fists flying, Gilyarovsky throws himself

	at the guard who have refused to shoot at the sailors on the prow of the 
battleship, 

	 and he shouts: 

[TITLE:] 'Shoot, you villains!' 

The priest, his cross raised, stiffens with terror. 

Gilyarovsky's face is distorted with rage. 

The sailors in the guard, 

	one after another,

	return their rifles to the position at ease, 

	 or lower the muzzles. 

Again Gilyarovsky shouts, 

	and hurls himself at the guard with his fists, 

	and tries to snatch one of the sailor's rifles. 

Matyushenko shouts to the sailors: 

[TITLE:] 'Seize the rifles, comrades!' 

He races to get a rifle.

Gilyarovsky snatches the sailor's rifle. 

Vakulinchuk gives orders to the sailors. 

The storm has burst. Sailors race for the rifles. 

Sailors encircle Gilyarovsky. 

Vakulinchuk shouts to the sailors: 

[TITLE:] 'Smash the dragons! Smash them!' 

He shouts again:

[TITLE:] 'Smash every one of them!' 

He continues to shout.

The sailors remaining on the prow of the battleship fling off the tarpaulin and 

	 run towards 

	the group of officers. 

The sailors encircle the officers.

One sailor tries to snatch Gilyarovsky's rifle.

The sailors on the prow of the battleship, having flung off the tarpaulin, 
run quickly.

Sailors in the guard raise their rifles.

The tarpaulin, picked up by the wind, descends slowly to the deck.

The sailors knock the officers down 

	and attack them.

Sailors with rifles run rapidly around the upper deck. 

The flag of St Andrew flutters 

	above the fighting on the battleship. 

The sailors attack the officers 

	and the Commander.

Sailors with rifles run rapidly around the decks. 

Sailors rush to the armory, 

	and one of them 

	quickly dispenses rifles 

	to the sailors who come running up, 

	one 

	after another 

	without interruption.


Gilyarovsky and Commander Golikov start to descend the admiral's hatch, but 
Golikov is seized by sailors. 

Elsewhere, sailors attack an officer. 

Golikov throws off the sailors.

The sailors knock the officer down onto the tarpaulin. 

Elsewhere, Matyushenko, with other sailors, attacks a group of petty 
officers.

The flag of St Andrew flutters.

Near the admiral's hatch, the young officer with the small moustache repels 
the sailors' attacks. 

Sailors with rifles run rapidly around the decks. 

The sailors roll the officer up in the tarpaulin. 

Rifles, 

	one 

	after another, 

	 are passed through

	to the sailors who come running up. 

The sailors roll the officer up in the tarpaulin. 

Gilyarovsky, armed with a rifle, chases after Vakulinchuk. 

Vakulinchuk climbs across a circular bastion and lets himself drop,

	trying to hide from him.

From a hatch protrudes a hand with a crucifix, 

	standing out clearly against the background of the grating. 

Vakulinchuk, raising himself slightly, grasps the handrail near the hatch.

From the hatch appears the figure of the priest, cross in hand, ascending the 
ladder.

Vakulinchuk looks at him uncomprehendingly. 

The priest speaks to him: 

[TITLE:] 'Fear God,' 

	and stretches out the cross to him.

The crucifix stands out against the background of the grating. 

Matyushenko and his comrades attack the officers. 

Vakulinchuk shouts at the priest: 

[TITLE:] 'Get out of the way, you sorcerer!' 

	and he pushes him 

	down.

Running up, Gilyarovsky raises the butt of his rifle against Vakulinchuk, 

	 but Vakulinchuk seizes the rifle and tries to tear it from him.

The sailors roll the officer up in the tarpaulin. He resists, clutching at a 
ring on the deck.

Vakulinchuk and Gilyarovsky fight for possession of the rifle. 

The officer lets go of the ring. The sailors drag him away from it.

For a moment appear the legs of Vakulinchuk and Gilyarovsky, fighting for 
possession of the rifle. 

Vakulinchuk runs down the ladder, but, again, 

	for a moment appear the legs 

	of Vakulinchuk and Gilyarovsky, fighting for possession of the rifle.

On the deck, the crowd of sailors continues to attack the officers.

The priest, stepping out of the hatch, extends his cross to Vakulinchuk. 

At that moment, Gilyarovsky seizes the rifle from Vakulinchuk. 

The crucifix falls 

	and sticks upright into the floor of the deck. 

The priest falls

	into the hatch 

	and, hitting his head against a pipe, loses consciousness. 

Vakulinchuk 

	quickly runs down 

	the ladder into the hatch, 

	chased by Gilyarovsky. 

Vakulinchuk turns, sees 

	the crucifix stuck into the floor of the deck, and

	runs on.

Through the ship's galley an officer runs, 

	seeking safety from the sailors. 

Up onto the wardroom piano

	an officer clambers, struggling with the sailors pursuing him.

He treads on the keys 

	and on the candelabra, 

	and, having got on top of the piano, he fires his revolver at the sailors, 

	but the sailors pursuing him drag him down from the piano, 

	upturning him.

An officer hangs by his hands from the muzzle of a cannon. 

In the wardroom, the sailors beat the officer against the floor. 

On one side of the battleship, an officer notices a sailor swarming along a 
ladder in pursuit of him.

The officer, seeking safety from the sailor, clambers up the side of the 
battleship, clutching at the holdfasts, but the sailor's leg kicks him over 
the head. The officer clambers back, and the sailor descends after him. 

In the wardroom, the sailors continue 

	to attack the officer.

Two sailors run up the ladder to a hatch.

On the side of the battleship, the sailor, descending by the holdfasts, again 
kicks the officer over the head.

In the wardroom, a sailor attacks the officer with a music-stool.

Hanging over the arm of a chair, only the hand of the dead officer can be 
seen.

On the side of the battleship, the sailor propels 

	the officer into the sea.

The water receives the officer greedily.

On a life-belt, the clear inscription: 'Prince Potemkin Tavrichesky.'

Sailors with rifles run rapidly around the decks. 

With the butt of his rifle, 

	a sailor attacks 

	an officer who has run to the end of the muzzle of a cannon.

The officer loses balance, 

	somersaults in the air, 

	and falls 

	into the sea, 

	where he struggles to get out.

Smirnov, the small, short-sighted ship's surgeon, tries to conceal himself 
behind a row of hose-pipes, 

	but he is detected 

	and encircled by sailors, 

	who drag him away. 

He clings helplessly to a rope.

The sailors try to tear him from the rope, 

	and they carry him away, 

	 head downwards, 

	the rope trailing after him, 

	down a metal ladder. 

In his deathly fear 

	he clutches with his hands at the steps.

The priest, fallen into the hatch, opens one eye for an instant and closes 
it.

Smirnov clings with his hands to the steps.

On the ladder, the legs

	of the sailors and of the struggling officer.

On the deck, sailors with rifles hunt down the fleeing officers. 

Ship's surgeon Smirnov 

	is snatched up by a couple of sailors. 

With a swing, they hurl him 

	overboard.

Head downwards, he flies through the air and 

	falls into the sea, 

	raising a fountain of spray and 

	foam.

[TITLE:] GO AND FEED YOUR MAGGOTS AT THE BOTTOM OF THE SEA 	 !

And on a cable hang the pince-nez of ship's surgeon Smirnov -- those same 
pince-nez through which, with indifference, he regarded the maggoty meat.

On the deck, the sailors continue to attack the officers. 

[TITLE:] 'Comrades! The ship is in our hands!' 

The sailors on the deck throw their caps high in the air with joy.

The smashed keys of the piano: evidence of the struggle in the wardroom.

On the decks, the sailors continue to hunt down the officers.

[TITLE:] FLOWING WITH BLOOD, VAKULINCHUK SEEKS SAFETY FROM THE BESTIAL 
GILYAROVSKY . ..

Gilyarovsky watches closely, 

	as Vakulinchuk climbs onto a yard-arm

	and moves along it.

Gilyarovsky, his rifle in his hand, draws closer to Vakulinchuk, 

	not once lowering his gaze from him. 

Vakulinchuk looks at Gilyarovsky. 

Gilyarovsky turns, 

	takes cover behind a buttress, 

	aims with his rifle

	at Vakulinchuk on the yard-arm, 

	carefully screwing up one eye, 

	and he fires.

Vakulinchuk clutches the back of his head with his hand. 

Gilyarovsky looks at Vakulinchuk.

Vakulinchuk, mortally wounded, falls from the yard-arm and, 

	catching hold of some ropes, 

	slips down the ropes 

	into the cradle they form above the sea.

The sailors on the deck throw their caps high in the air with joy.

The ropes descend on a pulley, and 

	the unconscious Vakulinchuk slips down towards the sea in the cradle they 
form. 

A sailor shouts:

[TITLE:] 'Vakulinchuk's overboard!' 

	and runs along the yard-arm, 

	 followed by a second sailor, and a third. 

Grasping the ropes, 

	they hasten to the aid of Vakulinchuk.

Vakulinchuk lies on his back in the cradle of ropes, his head hanging down. 

[TITLE:] 'Save Vakulinchuk!' 

The sailors jump into the water.

Vakulinchuk hangs over the cradle of ropes above the water, 

	and he falls into the sea. 

The sailors quickly swim 

	towards the sinking Vakulinchuk. 

The sailors slowly carry 

	the body of the dead Vakulinchuk up the gangway.

[TITLE:] AND HE WHO WAS THE FIRST TO TAKE UP THE CRY OF REBELLION WAS THE FIRST 
TO FALL AT THE HAND OF THE EXECUTIONER 	

A cutter, with sailors in file on either side of the deck and with the body 
of Vakulinchuk on high, 

	moves 

[TITLE:] 	TOWARDS THE SHORE	

The passage of the cutter, with the body of Vakulinchuk, hero and victim of 
the rebellion, on high 

	gives impetus 

	and intensity 

	to the noble spirit of mourning and triumph which prevails.

[TITLE:] ODESSA	

On the still quay in the moonlight: a solitary tent. 

[TITLE:] THE TENT AT THE END OF ODESSA'S NEW JETTY -- VAKULINCHUK'S LAST 
RESTING PLACE	

In the tent lies the body of Vakulinchuk.

An inscription on a sheet of paper: 'On account of a spoonful of borshch.'

In his hands is a lighted candle. His body is turned towards the town, which 
is visible in the distance through the opening in the tent.

First, the cutter passes before the tent, 

	then a large sailing-ship heading in a different direction floats by and 
obscures the view of the town.




PART THREE: THE DEAD MAN CRIES FOR FOR VENGEANCE

Moonlight plays upon the water.

[TITLE:] MIST SWIRLS UP FROM THE NIGHT 	

In the bay, 

	ships 

	wrapped in thick mist. 

The turgid waves splash gently. 

Seagulls on a buoy, alarmed, take wing. 

The turgid waves splash gently. 

The bay 

	is full 

	of ships.

Dawn. Beyond the corpse of Vakulinchuk, in whose hands a lighted candle 
burns, can be seen the distant town. 

A flag of mourning flutters on top of the tent. 

Near the tent, absorbed and indifferent, a fisherman fishes from the jetty.

A large, ocean-going vessel towers above.

[TITLE:] VOICES FROM THE JETTY MAKE THEMSELVES HEARD THROUGH THE MIST	

Poorly dressed men and women and children 

	begin to move towards the tent containing the body of Vakulinchuk.

Beyond the corpse of Vakulinchuk, the lighted candle in his hands, the town 
can be seen in the distance.

An old woman enters the tent and straightens the lighted candle in 
Vakulinchuk's hands. 

All who approach, approach the tent -- men and women.

Insensible to everything, two fishermen fish. 

The lighted candle 

	in the hands of the dead Vakulinchuk. 

The crowd around the tent quickly grows larger. Two noblewomen, wearing 
expensive white dresses and carrying elegant white umbrellas, peep curiously 
into the tent. 

The sails of a nearby ship are put up.

[TITLE:] AND TOGETHER WITH THE SUN THE NEWS BREAKS ON THE TOWN 	 !

At first empty, the long, narrow steps leading down to the harbor quickly 
fill with moving people.

[TITLE:] THE BATTLESHIP IN THE ANCHORAGE 	

The multitude descends 

	the long, narrow steps.

[TITLE:] THE REBELLION 	 

Along the bridge, 

	quietly and purposefully, 

	flows the stream of people.

[TITLE:] THE SHORE 	 

Along the harbor 

	flows the stream of people.

[TITLE:] THE MURDERED SAILOR 	

The crowd around the tent containing the body of Vakulinchuk quickly grows. 
Men and women regard the murdered man, then pass on.

A small boy walks past the corpse of Vakulinchuk and places a coin in the 
sailor's cap lying on a barrel. 

In the hands of Vakulinchuk, the candle burns. 

The sailor's cap on the barrel is filled with coins. 

Near the tent, a student delivers a fiery speech. 

Along the jetty

	flows the vast stream of people. 

The multitude descends the long, narrow steps by the bridge. 

The endless stream of people flows along the jetty. 

Descending by both the steps which lead from the bridge to the harbor, the 
stream of people 

	 surges thickly and excitedly under the arch of the bridge. 

A vast, solid crowd surrounds 

	the tent containing the body of Vakulinchuk. 

A woman turns to the crowd: 

[TITLE:] 'Let us not forget him!' 

	 and she points to the corpse of Vakulinchuk. 

The inscription on a sheet of paper: 'On account of a spoonful of borshch.'

Angrily, the woman says:

[TITLE:] 'On account of a spoonful of borshch.'

A young man in a sailor's sweater agitatedly reads an address to the crowd:

[TITLE:] 'People of Odessa! Before us lies the body of the brutally murdered 
sailor, Grigory Vakulinchuk -- murdered by a senior officer of the squadron 
battleship, "Prince Tavrichesky." Let us have our revenge on the bloodthirsty 
vampires! Death to the oppressors! Signed by the crew of the squadron 
battleship, "Prince Tavrichesky".' 

The people listen to him avidly. 

Women standing near the tent weep.

An old woman kneels by the corpse of Vakulinchuk and kisses his hand.

The body of Vakulinchuk with the lighted candle in his hands.

The old woman weeps.

An old man in pince-nez looks grievously 

	at the murdered Vakulinchuk. 

Two old women kneel by the corpse.

A supercilious-looking man smokes unconcernedly, and looks on with a smirk

	 when a woman falls to the ground in grief. 

[TITLE:] A LASTING MONUMENT TO THE FALLEN WARRIORS	 !

Women begin to sing. 

[TITLE:] ALL FOR ONE 	

The whole crowd begins to sing.

[TITLE:] ONE	

The dead Vakulinchuk with the lighted candle in his hands. 

[TITLE:] 	 FOR ALL 	

A vast crowd around the tent.

Two blind women singing. 

A woman weeping. 

The whole crowd 

	with heads bent in woe.

Tears form in the eyes of a dock-worker. 

A man nervously touches his forage-cap.

The dock-worker weeps, covering his face with his hand. 

The student delivers his speech. 

[TITLE:] 'Down with the butchers!' 

The crowd 

	is agitated.

A fist is clenched in hatred. 

The crowd 

	listens to the speaker. 

A clenched fist.

The excitement of the crowd grows. 

One of the women begins to make a speech. 

Again, a fist is clenched in hatred. 

The woman turns to the crowd. 

An old woman shouts in excitement. 

A fist is raised threateningly.

Everybody excitedly waves their hands and shouts: 

[TITLE:] 'Down with the autocrats!' 

The excitement of the crowd 

	rises 

	ever higher 

	and higher, 

	and draws near 

	to its peak.

A suspicious-looking man in a straw hat, his hands tucked insolently into his 
waistcoat, looks on with a disdainful smile. 

The woman shouts:

[TITLE:] 'Mothers and brothers! Let there be no distinctions or enmities among 
ourselves!' 

	and she exhorts the crowd.

The suspicious-looking man in the straw hat smiles disdainfully.

The woman continues her speech.

The suspicious-looking man in the straw hat cries out: 

[TITLE:] 'Down with the Jews!' 

	and smiles insolently. 

The men standing near him 

	sharply

	 and angrily, 

	one 	 

after another, 

	turn their heads.

The reactionary [a member of the Black Hundred, a virulent anti-Jewish 
society] continues to smile insolently. 

One of the men advances towards him angrily. 

The reactionary grows frightened. 

The man continues to advance towards him.

The reactionary pulls his straw hat over his eyes and tries to walk away, but 
he is stopped.

The man looks at him in fury. 

The reactionary 

	is surrounded by men.

They pull his straw hat over his face and 

	begin 

	to attack him.

Pathetically, the student delivers his speech. 

The sea of people 

	surges in agitation.

Pathetically, the student delivers his speech. 

The women frenziedly wave their arms. 

Pathetically, the student continues his speech. 

The women shout in their frenzy. 

The student appeals to the crowd: 

[TITLE:] 'Shoulder to shoulder!' 

The multitude descends the long, narrow steps by the bridge.

[TITLE:] THE LAND IS OURS 	 !

Under the arch of the bridge the sea of moving people sways convulsively.

[TITLE:] THE FUTURE IS OURS 	 !

Along the bridge the people move.

The women in the crowd near the tent containing the body of Vakulinchuk 
continue to shout in their frenzy. 

The sea of people surges with excitement. 

Pathetically, the student continues his speech. 

The excitement of the crowd 

	reaches 

	its peak.

The sailors make their appearance 

	on the decks and by the gun-turret of the battleship, 

	and begin to listen to the speakers.

[TITLE:] THE DELEGATE FROM THE SHORE 	

A worker speaks to the sailors:

[TITLE:] 'We must inflict a decisive blow on the enemy!' 

He appeals to the sailors:

[TITLE:] 'Together with the revolutionary workers throughout all Russia	', 

	and he exhorts them passionately. 

The sailors answer him: 

[TITLE:] 'We will be victorious!'

The worker's speech seizes the imagination of the sailors on the decks and 

	in the watch-tower.

The sailors, taking off their caps, 

	rapturously 

	applaud 

	the delegate.

The sailors standing in the watch-tower also take off their caps and wave 
their arms to the delegate.

[TITLE:] TENSELY AND VIGILANTLY, THE SHORE KEEPS ITS EYE ON THE 'POTEMKIN'	

The inhabitants of the town, standing on the harbor steps, gaze at the 
battleship in the distance.

On the battleship, the sailors, their heads thrown high, 

	watch tensely, 

	as the red flag is raised.

The inhabitants of the town joyfully praise the insurgent battleship.

The red flag is raised victoriously up the mast of the battleship.




PART FOUR: THE ODESSA STEPS

[TITLE:] IN THOSE MEMORABLE DAYS THE TOWN LIVED AT ONE WITH THE REBELLIOUS 
BATTLESHIP 	

In the harbor, the townspeople load their sailing-boats with provisions.

[TITLE:] A FLEET OF WHITE-SAILED YAWLS RACES THROUGH THE WATER TO THE SIDES OF 
THE BATTLESHIP	

The sails of the boats are put up, 

	and they fill with wind. 

The boats push off, 

	and sail past the town, 

	and the wharf, 

	and out into the open sea.

The passing boats are seen as a background to a curved colonnade overlooking 
the water from the height of the town. 

A demonstration takes place beneath the arch of the bridge. 

In the distance can be seen the white sails of the boats. 

On the wharf, an educated young woman, an umbrella in her hand, and a man -- 
apparently a professor -- look ardently, but with reserve, in the direction 
of the rebellious battleship. 

A group of workers (two men and a woman) tumultuously hail the rebellious 
sailors.

The young woman with the umbrella opens it out joyfully and waves her 
black-gloved hand, and the man with the appearance of a professor takes off 
his hat.

Standing with a young schoolgirl, an elderly woman in pince-nez rapturously 
waves her hand. 

A student shouts joyfully. 

A yacht sails across the sea,

	and the fleet of white-sailed yawls.

On the mast of the battleship the red flag flutters victoriously. 

The boats sail towards the battleship.

The sailors on board the battleship wave their caps in delight. 

The boats 

	sail up, 

	one after another, 

	to the sides of the battleship.  

Sailors pull the oars of the rowing-boats.

The sailors on board the battleship wave their caps in delight. 

The sailing-boats draw up by the side of the battleship. 

Sailors from the battleship quickly descend the gangway. 

Sailing-boats and rowing-boats draw up. 

The sailing-boats 

	drop their sails.

The sailors on board the battleship wave their caps in delight. 

Sailing-boats 

	surround the battleship.

The sailors on board the battleship wave their caps in delight. 

The inhabitants of the town, standing on the harbor steps, look at the 
battleship in the distance.

A woman with a live goose in her hands climbs up the gangway and gives it to 
the sailors.

On the sailing-boats, bread is passed from hand to hand. 

The inhabitants of the town, standing on the harbor steps, look at the 
battleship in the distance.

The people in the sailing-boats look at the sailors on board the battleship.

Cigarettes, a sucking-pig are passed to the sailors, 

	a crateful of poultry, 

	geese.

On board the battleship, the inhabitants of the town embrace the sailors.

Along the gangway are carried a basket of eggs, 

	another sucking-pig.

The inhabitants of the town, standing on the harbor steps, 

	look into the distance, 

	and hail the battleship. 

A lady with a veil and lorgnette 

	and a lady in an expensive white dress, an umbrella over her arm, also 
look at the battleship. Past them, a legless invalid drags himself on his 
hands.

The lady in the expensive white dress, an umbrella over her arm, waves
elegantly in the direction of the rebellious battleship.

From behind the lady with the veil and lorgnette, the legless invalid moves 
on his hands, 

	and he looks in the direction of the battleship. 

The lady with the veil looks through her lorgnette at the ship.

The legless invalid joyfully waves his cap with one hand. 

A woman draped with a shawl stands beside her small son. 

On the mast of the battleship the red flag flutters victoriously. 

The woman, draped with a shawl, and her son look joyfully at the battleship.

A girl and a boy wave their small hands in delight. 

The crowd, standing on the harbor steps, tumultuously hails the insurgent 
battleship.

[TITLE:] SUDDENLY	

A woman with bobbed hair throws back her head in terror. 

The crowd on the steps shudders and begins to run down the steps.

The legless invalid, trying to save himself, leaps precipitately on his hands 
down one of the high balustrades flanking the steps.

A rank of soldiers draws near to the top of the long, broad steps.

The lady with the veil and lorgnette, having fallen, raises herself and runs 
down the steps.

In terror, the crowd runs down the steps. 

Fatally wounded, a man begins to fall.

In the instant before his death, the steps appear fleetingly in front of his 
eyes. He falls 

	onto the steps.

A small boy, wounded, falls nearby. 

In terror, the crowd runs down the steps. 

The boy clutches his head with his hands. 

In terror, the crowd runs down the steps.

Relentless, like a machine, ranks of soldiers with rifles trailed descend the 
steps.

In terror, the crowd runs down the steps.

Behind the balustrade a group of terrified women hide -- among them the 
elderly woman in pince-nez. 

Men leap from the balustrade onto the ground. 

Behind one of the balustrades, a man and a woman hide. 

Behind the other balustrade an old man in pince-nez, a small schoolboy and a 
woman hide. The old man in pince-nez is unexpectedly hit by a bullet. 

A rank of soldiers fires into the crowd.

The man hidden with the woman behind one of the balustrades falls dead.

In terror, the crowd runs down the steps.

A man jumps over the wounded old man in pince-nez. The old man raises himself 
and looks at him. 

In terror, the crowd runs down the steps.

The old man in pince-nez looks from behind the balustrade. 

The woman draped with a shawl runs down the steps, holding her small son by 
the hand.

The ranks of soldiers aim, and fire into the crowd. 

The son of the woman draped with a shawl falls onto the steps. 

Mechanically, the woman draped with a shawl continues to run down the steps.

The fallen boy raises himself and shouts.

The fleeing mother stops

	 and turns.

The boy falls back, unconscious.

In horror, the mother tears at her hair.

In terror, the crowd runs down the steps -- over the fallen boy.

Her eyes crazed, the mother goes up the steps. 

In terror, the crowd runs down the steps. 

	trampling the slaughtered boy. 

In terror, the crowd runs down the steps. 

The fleeing people 

	trample the slaughtered boy.

Her eyes crazed, the mother goes up the steps. 

The crowd runs down the steps.

Her hands to her head in horror, the mother goes up the steps. 

The crowd tramples the slaughtered boy.

Her hands to her head in horror, the mother goes up the steps. 

The crowd runs down the steps.

Her slaughtered son in her arms, the mother goes up the steps 

	towards a rank of soldiers.

In terror, the crowd runs down the steps.

The elderly woman in pince-nez, hidden behind the balustrade, exhorts 

	the women with her 

	to advance towards the soldiers, in order to stop the massacre.

Her slaughtered son in her arms, the demented mother goes up the steps. 

In a frenzy, the elderly woman in pince-nez exhorts the women with her.

[TITLE:] 'Come! Let us plead with them!' 

She regards them boldly.

In terror, the crowd continues to run down the steps. 

The elderly woman in pince-nez smiles 

	encouragingly

	at the women with her and at the old men, 

	all frozen with fear.

Relentless, like a machine, the rank of soldiers with rifles trailed descends 
the steps.

Her slaughtered son in her arms, the demented mother goes up the steps.

The women are frozen with fear.

The elderly woman in pince-nez smiles encouragingly.

A young girl, 

	the old men, 

	men, an old woman, 

	and an invalid on crutches 

	stand up behind her.

The rank of soldiers fires into the crowd. 

In terror, the crowd continues to run down the steps. 

Her slaughtered son in her arms, the demented mother goes up the steps.

Led by the elderly woman in pince-nez, the group of women and old men go up 
the steps towards the rank of soldiers, 

	and pleadingly hold out their hands to them. 

Through the corpses strewn on the steps, her slaughtered son in her arms, the 
mother continues up the steps.

Through the corpses strewn on the steps, relentless, the rank of soldiers 
with rifles trailed continues to descend the steps. 

Her slaughtered son in her arms, going up the steps strewn with corpses, the 
mother shouts to the soldiers: 

[TITLE:] 'Hear me! Don't shoot!' 

Inexorably, the rank of soldiers moves on. 

The shadows of the soldiers fall on the steps.

Her slaughtered son in her arms, the mother shouts again to the soldiers:

[TITLE:] 'My boy is badly hurt!' 

She draws close to the rank of soldiers, their rifles aimed 

	and to the officer, his sabre raised.

Led by the elderly woman in pince-nez, the group of women and old men, 

	pleading, 

	 go up the steps.

The officer lowers his sabre, and a volley is fired. 

Her slaughtered son in her arms, the mother falls onto the steps.

At the bottom of the steps, the people run onto the carriage-way, 

.. and horsemen charge them.

Her slaughtered son held tight to her breast, the mother lies on her back.

Her hands are arranged in the form of a cross, and 

	over them creep the advancing shadows of the soldiers.

[TITLE:] THE COSSACKS 	

The cossacks charge straight at the crowd, and

	the people are trampled by the horses' hooves and beaten with the whips of 
the horsemen.

A rank of soldiers descends the steps 

	and fires into the crowd.

The group of women and old men, pressing themselves against the balustrade, 
go up the steps.

The rank of soldiers fires volley after volley into the crowd. 

The group of women and old men fall onto the steps. 

The legs of the soldiers move on. 

A beautiful woman [a young mother] shields a pram containing a child from the 
fleeing people.

Relentless, like a machine, the rank of soldiers descends the steps.

The beautiful woman opens her mouth in terror 

	 and clings to the side of the pram.

With her body, she shields the child in the pram from the fleeing people. 

The rank of soldiers descends the steps 

	and fires.

In terrible pain, the young mother throws back her head. 

The pram with the child comes to rest at the edge of the steps.

The young mother, her mouth open in terror, 

	clutches her dress with her hands.

The fleeing people are trampled by the horses' hooves and beaten with the 
whips of the cossacks. 

Blood on the young mother's stomach. 

The young mother, her mouth open, 

	begins to fall, 

	and the pram with the child rolls to the very edge of the steps.

The rank of soldiers with rifles trailed 

	 descends the steps.

The young mother, falling onto the steps, 

	pushes 

	the pram with the child.

A cossack attacks a man with his whip.

The fleeing people are trampled by the horses' hooves and beaten with the 
whips of the cossacks. 

Fallen, the young mother 

	jolts 

	the pram with the child 

	over the edge of the steps.

The elderly woman in pince-nez is frozen with horror. 

The pram with the child 

	bounces 

	down the steps. 

The young mother lies dead on the steps.

On the carriage-way, the cossacks beat the crowd with whips, and, 

	at the foot of the steps, 

	a rank of soldiers fires point-blank at the people. 

The pram with the child bounces over the steps. 

The elderly woman in pince-nez is frozen with horror.

The pram with the child bounces over the steps. 

A terrified student presses himself into the corner of a building. 

At the foot of the steps, the rank of soldiers fires volley after volley into 
the crowd.

The pram with the child leaps across the steps.

A terrified student presses himself into the corner of a building. 

Down the steps, 

	over the corpses, 

	careers the pram with the child. 

The rank of soldiers fires into the crowd.

The pram with the child careers over the corpses down the steps.

The student pressed into the corner of the building shouts in terror.

The pram with the child overturns. 

A cossack brandishes 

	his sword, 

	and puts out an eye of the elderly woman in pince-nez. 

The battleship : the gun-turret looms ominously.

[TITLE:] AND THEN THE CANNONS OF THE BATTLESHIP OPEN FIRE IN RETALIATION 
AGAINST THE SAVAGERY OF THE ARMED FORCES OF ODESSA 	

The muzzles of the cannons, pointed menacingly towards the town.

[TITLE:] THE BULL'S EYE -- THE ODESSA THEATRE 	 ! 

The sculpture on the pediment of the theatre.

[TITLE:] THE ODESSA THEATRE -- THE TOWN'S MILITARY HEADQUARTERS	

The cannons of the battleship open fire

	at the cupids

	adorning 

	the cornice of the theatre. 

A shell bursts 

	 against the iron gates of the theatre building, 

	enshrouding everything in smoke. 

The sculptures: a lion dormant, 

	a lion with evil face raised, 

	a lion up on its paws, snarling. 

The iron gates of the theatre building 

	are enshrouded in smoke.

The smoke disperses -- to reveal that the theatre building has been 
destroyed.




PART FIVE: MEETING THE SQUADRON 

[TITLE:] ON THE BATTLESHIP, MEETINGS CONTINUE PASSIONATELY UNTIL EVENING 	

A speaker cries to the sailors:

[TITLE:] 'The people of Odessa look to you for their liberation. Disembark now, 
and the army will join forces with you.' 

The speaker 

	continues. The muzzles of the cannons loom menacingly. 

The sailors 

	argue among themselves. 

One of the sailors says:

[TITLE:] 'We cannot disembark. The admiralty squadron has begun to move against 
us.' 

He continues to speak.

The sailors wave their arms about excitedly. 

The sailor exhorts his comrades, 

	who wave to him 

	with their caps.

The sailor exhorts his comrades.

The sailors wave their arms about excitedly. 

The sailor passionately exhorts his comrades. 

One of the sailors listening to him is lost in thought. 

The sailor continues to exhort his comrades, 

	but the other sailor interrupts him.

[TITLE:] WITH ONE HEART THEY DECIDE TO FACE THE SQUADRON	

The empty deck.

[TITLE:] A NIGHT OF ANXIETY BEGINS	

The flag comes down.

The moon appears from behind the clouds. 

Moonlight plays upon the water.

On the battleship, the watch looks tensely into the distance. 

The sea splashes gently.

The watch moves along the side of the battleship. 

The sea splashes gently.

A sailor gazes tensely into the distance.

The silhouette of the battleship stands out starkly and majestically in the 
moonlight. 

The motionless needles 

	of the pressure-gauges. 

By the engines -- sleeping sailors. 

The watch looks tensely into the darkness. 

A searchlight directed on the water.

The watch and the sailor gaze into the darkness. 

The searchlight directed on the water. 

By the engines -- sleeping sailors.

The motionless needles of the pressure-gauges.

[TITLE:] THE SQUADRON CREEPS UP IN THE DARKNESS 	

Murk over the water.

The squadron on the horizon. 

Murk over the water.

Matyushenko, fighting against sleep, 

	smokes 

	in one of the cabins.

Smoke pours from the funnels of a passing ship. 

By the engines -- sleeping sailors. 

The helmsman asleep at the wheel. 

By the engines -- sleeping sailors. 

The searchlight directed on the water. 

In a cabin, a sailor asleep on a divan.

Matyushenko, with other sailors, awakens the helmsman. 

The cabin: the sailor asleep on the divan.

Another sailor at the wheel.

[TITLE:] THROATS HOARSE FROM CONTINUAL SPEECH BREATHE HARSHLY AND UNEVENLY 	

The cabin: sailors asleep 

	on the divan, 

	in a deck-chair.

Matyushenko enters the cabin and looks at the sleeping sailors. 

The sailor on the divan awakens.

Sailors close the shutter over the searchlight. 

Matyushenko talks with the awakened sailor, 

	and goes out of the cabin.

The sailor turns over onto his other side. 

Sailors close the shutter over the searchlight. 

The sailor on the divan sleeps. 

Sailors run over to a handrail.

By the engines -- the sailors roll over uneasily in their sleep. 

The sailor on the divan awakens again. 

The helmsman at the wheel.

A sailor by the handrail beckons to another.

By the engines -- the sailors roll over uneasily in their sleep. 

The sailor by the handrail 

	looks through a telescope.

The sailors by the handrail gaze tensely into the distance. 

The motionless needles 

	of the pressure-gauges.

Sailors look through a pair of binoculars 

	and the telescope.


The watch looks through the binoculars. 

The pressure-gauges.

Sailors look through the binoculars and the telescope. 

The watch looks through the binoculars. 

A sailor in the watch-tower shouts. 

The sailor turns the telescope.

Near the muzzle of a cannon, a sailor gazes into the darkness.

The watches look into the distance. 

The sailor turns the telescope. 

The squadron is visible on the horizon.

The sailor looking through the telescope bends and cries: 

[TITLE:] 'Squadron on the horizon!' 

The sailor near the muzzle of the cannon turns quickly towards the cry.

The sailor again looks through the telescope. 

The alarmed figures 

	of the sailors.

Matyushenko rapidly descends the ladder to the cabin. 

In an instant, the sailor in the deck-chair is awake, 

	and the sailor on the divan. 

The one 

	and the other raise themselves,

	stand up, 

	 and quickly run out.

A running sailor can be seen through a grating. 

The sailors run up to Matyushenko and question him. 

In the cabin, Matyushenko stops a young sailor. 

The young sailor looks confusedly at Matyushenko. 

Matyushenko throws off his jacket.

The young sailor tightens the jacket round himself, and Matyushenko takes the 
midshipman's cap off the young sailor's head.

Sailors climbing up holdfasts.

Matyushenko puts a sailor's cap on the young sailor's head. 

The young sailor ascends the ladder from the cabin, followed by Matyushenko.

The sailors rush up the holdfasts, 

	up the deck ladder, 

	up to a platform by the funnel. 

The sailors on the platform can see  

	the squadron on the horizon.

They continue to look at the squadron on the horizon. 

The sailor looks through the telescope. 

Sailors looking into the distance, 

..climbing up the holdfasts, 

	ascending to the platform by the funnel, 

	on the platform.

Matyushenko blows on his pipe.

[TITLE:] ALL HANDS ON DECK 	 !

The bugler 

	sounds his call.

A sailor blows on his pipe. 

The sailors come running.

[TITLE:] ACTION STATIONS 	 !

The bugler 

	sounds his call. 

About the deck 

	the sailors run.

Sailors remove the tarpaulins from the cannons. 

In the gun-turret, a gunner 

	prepares 

	for battle.

About the deck the sailors run. 

Matyushenko blows on his pipe. 

About the deck the sailors run. 

Sailors run 

	to the engine-room.

The helmsman and Matyushenko speak over the telephone 

	to the engineer in the engine-room. 

Matyushenko speaks over the telephone 

	to the engineer.

About the deck the sailors run. 

Sailors move 

	the heavy shells

	up the lift to the cannons.

The sailors remove the tarpaulins from the cannons. 

The engineer, speaking on the telephone, passes an order to a comrade.

The engineer pulls a lever.

The telephones ring in the engine-room.

Sailors descend the gangway and pull up the handrail.

The engineer pulls a lever. 

The sailors 

	raise 

	the gangway.

The engineer pulls a lever. 

The sailors 

	suspend 

	the gangway 

	along the side of the battleship. 

A tarpaulin is spread over the deck. 

Sailors take the heavy shells from the lift, 

	and lay them on the tarpaulin,

	one 

	after another.

Matyushenko stands by the helm and shouts into the speaking-tube.

[TITLE:] FULL SPEED AHEAD 	

The engineer listens on the telephone.

Behind the helmsman, Matyushenko speaks on the telephone. 

The sailors 

	working in the engine-room. 

Smoke pouring from the funnels. 

The engineer presses a lever. 

Faster and faster 

	the engines run.

The battleship carves its way through the sea, dividing the water into tall 
waves.

The calm sea splashes gently against the shore.

The battleship carves its way through the sea, dividing the water into tall 
waves. 

Ever faster and faster 

	the engines run.

The battleship carves its way through the sea, dividing the water into tall 
waves. 

At full speed, 

	the engines run.

Smoke pours from the funnels.

Behind it, the battleship leaves a shining wake and clouds of smoke.

Matyushenko, speaking on the telephone, receives a message from a sailor 
approaching at the run, and he gives the order to the helmsman to turn the 
wheel. 

The gun-turrets swing menacingly. 

The gunner is prepared for battle.

The muzzles of the cannons are raised menacingly. 

The gunner looks at his sights. 

The muzzles of the cannons are raised. 

The gunner looks at his sights.

The prow of the battleship cuts through the water, 

	raising great waves on all sides.

Standing by the helm, Matyushenko looks through a telescope.

The squadron is visible on the horizon. 

Matyushenko speaks to the helmsman.

The needle of a pressure-gauge jumps about -- and moves up. 

The engineer speaks on the telephone. 

The needle jumps about -- and moves higher. 

The gunner is prepared for battle. 

The squadron on the horizon. 

The engines at full speed. 

The gunner by his sights. 

The gunner swings 

	his cannon.

The engines at full speed.

The needle of the pressure-gauge jumps about. 

[TITLE:] MAXIMUM SPEED 	 !

The needle as high as it can go. 

The engines at maximum speed.

Great waves caused by the passage of the battleship. 

The water bubbles and foams. 

Smoke pours from the funnels.

The helmsman, turning the wheel, listens to Matyushenko. 

Visible in the distance -- the squadron.

[TITLE:] THE 'POTEMKIN' AND DESTROYER NO. 267 	

Alongside the battleship -- a destroyer.

Standing by the helm, Matyushenko looks into the distance.

[TITLE:] THE SQUADRON ADVANCES 	

The squadron draws ever nearer and nearer. 

Smoke pours from the funnels.

Great waves caused by the passage of the battleship. 

The water bubbles and foams.

Matyushenko, standing by the helm, gives a signal. 

The gun-turret swings menacingly.

[TITLE:] THE SQUADRON DRAWS NEAR 	 !

Ever nearer and nearer 

	draws the squadron. 

The gunner sights his cannon. 

The gun-turret swings menacingly. 

Sailors carrying a shell.

The muzzles of the cannons loom menacingly. 

Smoke pours from the funnels.

Behind it, the battleship leaves a shining wake and clouds of smoke.

Standing by the helm, Matyushenko looks into the distance.

The squadron draws nearer. 

Matyushenko is plunged in thought. 

His hand goes to the speaking-tube. 

[TITLE:] 'Give the signal: "Join us"' 

He replaces the speaking-tube. 

A sailor signals with flags, 

	and another looks through a telescope. 

[TITLE:] 'Join	'

On ropes, the flags go up the mast.

On ropes, 

	the flags 

	 go up 

	the mast.

The battleship raises great waves 

	on all sides.

The squadron draws ever nearer and nearer. 

Smoke pours 

	from the funnels of an approaching ship. 

The muzzle of a cannon aimed towards the enemy. 

The helmsman looks through a telescope. 

The gunners await the signal.

[TITLE:] THE ENEMY IS WITHIN RANGE 	

The helmsman looks through a telescope. 

The gunners 

	await the signal.

A sailor with a shell in his arms. 

Sailors with shells in their arms.

[TITLE:] ALL FOR ONE 	

The cannons of the enemy turn slowly, 

	point towards the Potemkin, 

	are menacingly 

	raised.

[TITLE:] ONE FOR ALL 	

On the mast of the battleship the red flag flutters victoriously. 

Alongside the battleship -- the destroyer. 

A cannon raised 

	looms menacingly.

Standing by the helm, Matyushenko looks into the distance. 

The enemy squadron is near.

The gunners embrace each other before battle. 

A cannon is raised, 

	and looms menacingly. 

The gunners await the signal. 

The cannon looms menacingly.

Standing by the helm, Matyushenko shouts. 

The muzzles of all the cannons of the battleship 

	are directed 

	menacingly 

	towards the enemy.

[TITLE:] TO FIRE 	

The gunners tensely await the signal. 

Matyushenko looks uneasily into the distance. 

He blows on his pipe.

A cannon looms menacingly.

[TITLE:] OR NOT 	

A gunner tensely awaits the signal. 

The engines running.

The imperial eagle on the prow of the battleship. 

Sailors with shells in their arms, tensely expectant. 

Shells on the tarpaulin. 

The gunner motionless.

Suddenly, a smile appears on the face of one of the sailors. 

[TITLE:] 'Brothers!'

Joyfully, 

	the sailors

	break out into laughter.

The sailors run out onto the prow of the battleship. 

The sailors are overcome 

	with joy.

On the mast of the battleship the red flag flutters victoriously. 

The muzzles of the cannons are lowered.

The sailors on board the battleship tumultuously wave their caps. 

In return, 

	from the sides of the ships of the squadron passing, 

	the sailors joyfully 

	wave their caps.

[TITLE:] WITHIN THE HEARING OF THE TSARIST ADMIRALS, BROTHERLY CHEERS SOUND 
ACROSS THE WATER	

From the sides of the ships of the squadron passing, 

	the sailors 

	joyfully wave their caps.

Without a shot being fired, a ship of the admiralty squadron goes past the 
rebellious battleship.

[TITLE:] AND WITH THE RED FLAG OF FREEDOM PROUDLY FLUTTERING, WITHOUT A SINGLE 
SHOT BEING FIRED, THE INSURGENT BATTLESHIP PASSES THROUGH THE RANKS OF THE 
SQUADRON 	

The sailors on the decks of the battleship, 

	on the mast and in the watch-tower 

	tumultuously wave their caps in the air. 

Victoriously, the insurgent battleship passes through the ranks of the 
squadron.

Joyfully, the sailors on the mast, in the watch-tower, 

	on the decks 

	and on the prow of the battleship 

	wave their caps in the air.

Great waves caused by the passage of the battleship. 

The tall prow of the rebellious battleship moves victoriously onwards.

PG 1

SCREEN BLACK

JACK (V.O.)
People were always asking me, did I know Tyler Durden.

FADE IN:

INT. SOCIAL ROOM - TOP FLOOR OF HIGH-RISE - NIGHT

TYLER has the barrel of a HANDGUN lodged in JACK'S MOUTH.  They
struggle intensely.

They are both around 30; Tyler is blond, handsome, eyes burning with
frightening intensity; and JACK, brunette, is appealing in a dry sort
of way.  They are both sweating and disheveled; Jack seems to be losing
his will to fight.

TYLER
We won't really die.  We'll be immortal.

JACK
oor -- ee-ee --uh -- aa-i --

JACK (V.O.)
With a gun barrel between your teeth, you speak only in vowels.

Jack tongues the barrel to the side of his mouth.

JACK (still distorted)
You're thinking of vampires.

Jack tries to get the gun.  Tyler keeps control.

JACK (V.O.)
With my tongue, I can feel the silencer holes drilled into the barrel
of the gun.  Most of the noise a gunshot makes is expanding gases.  I
totally forgot about Tyler's whole murder-suicide thing for a second
and I wondered how clean the gun barrel was.

Tyler checks his watch.

TYLER
Three minutes.

Jack turns so that he can see down -- 71 STORIES.

PG 2

JACK (V.O.)
The building we're standing won't be here in three minutes.  You take a
98-percent concentration of fuming nitric acid and add three times as
much sulfuric in a bathtub full of ice.  Then, glycerin drop-by-drop. 
Nitroglycerin.  I know this because Tyler knows this.

Jack manages to SHOVE Tyler away.  Then, he leaps onto him and they
fall onto a table, then roll off onto the floor.  The gun falls and
slides.  They wrestle with each other, then dash for the gun.  Tyler
gets there first and grabs the gun.  DURING THE ABOVE:

JACK (V.O.)
The Demolitions Committee of Project Mayhem wrapped the foundation
columns of this building with blasting gelatin.  The primary charge
will blow the base charge, and this spot Tyler and I are standing on
will be a point in the sky.

Tyler drags Jack back to the glass wall and forces him to look out at
the city skyline.

TYLER
This is our world now.  Two minutes.

JACK (V.O.)
Two minutes to go and I'm wondering how I got here.

MOVE IN ON JACK'S FACE.

SLOWLY PULL BACK from Jack's face.  It's pressed against TWO LARGE
BREASTS that belong to ... BOB, a big moose of a man, around 35 years
old.  Jack is engulfed by Bob's arms in an embrace.  Bob weeps openly. 
His shoulders inhale themselves up in a long draw, then drop, drop,
drop in jerking sobs.  Jack gives Bob some squeezes in return, but his
face is stone.

JACK (V.O.)
Bob had bitch tits.

PG 3

PULL BACK TO WIDE ON

INT. HIGH SCHOOL GYMNASIUM - NIGHT

All the men are paired off, hugging each other, talking in emotional
tones.  Some pairs lean forward, heads pressed ear-to-ear, the way
wrestlers stand, locked.  Near the door a temporary sign on a stand:
"REMAINING MEN TOGETHER".

JACK (V.O.)
This was a support group for men with testicular cancer.  The big
moosie slobbering all over me was Bob.

BOB
I owned my own gym.  I did product endorsements.

JACK
You were a six-time champion.

JACK (V.O.)
Bob, the big cheesebread.  Always told me his life story.

BOB
We're still men.

JACK
Yes.  We're men.  Men is what we are.

JACK (V.O.)
Bob cried.  Six months ago, his testicles were removed.  Then hormone
therapy.  He developed bitch tits because his testosterone was too high
and his body upped the estrogen.  That was where my head fit -- into
his sweating tits that hang enormous, the way we think of God's as big.

Bob hugs tighter, then looks with empathy into Jack's eyes.

BOB
Maybe it's just seminoma.  With seminoma, you have a hundred percent
survival rate.

The Leader steps forward and signals everyone.

LEADER
Okay.  Group hug.

PG 4

Everyone converges into a cluster with arms thrown around shoulders,
making a big mass of sobbing, smiling goodwill.

JACK (V.O.)
No.  Wait.  Back up.  Let me start earlier.

INT. JACK'S BEDROOM - NIGHT

Jack lies in bed, staring at the ceiling.  He hears VOICES from beyond
the wall.  A FLY buzzes over his face.  He swats at it, missing.

JACK (V.O.)
For six months.  I couldn't sleep.

INT. DOCTOR'S OFFICE - DAY

Jack, eyes puffy, face pale, sits before the Doctor, who studies him
with bemusement.

DOCTOR
No, you can't die of insomnia.

JACK
Maybe I already died.  Look at my face.

DOCTOR
You need to lighten up.

JACK
Can you give me something?

JACK (V.O.)
Little red-and-blue Tuinal, lipstick-red Seconals.

DOCTOR (overlapping w/ above)
You need healthy, natural sleep.  Chew valerian root and get more
exercise.

The Doctor ushers Jack to the door.  They step into the

INT. HALLWAY

Where the Doctor starts moving away from Jack, picking up a chart on a
door.

JACK
I'm in pain.

PG 5

DOCTOR (facetious)
You want to see pain?  Swing by Meyer High on a Tuesday night and see
the guys with testicular cancer.

The Doctor moves into the other room.  Jack stares after him somberly. 
MOVE IN ON JACK'S FACE.

PULL BACK TO WIDE ON:

INT. HIGH SCHOOL GYMNASIUM - NIGHT

Jack stares at a group of men, including Bob, who are all listening to
a group member speak at a lectern.  The speaker has death-white skin
and sunken eyes -- he's clearly dying.

SPEAKER
I ... wanted to have three kids.  Two boys and a girl.  Mindy wanted
two girls and one boy.  We never agreed on anything.

The Speaker cracks a sad smile.  Some men chuckle, happy to lighten the
mood.

SPEAKER
Well ... she had her first girl a month ago ... with her new husband. 
Thank God, because she deserves ...

The speaker breaks down and WEEPS UNCONTROLLABLY.  Jack is riveted.  He
barely breathes.  CUT TO:

INT. GYM - LATER

A Leader herds people into pairing-off.

LEADER
Find a partner.

Bob starts toward Jack, shuffling his feet.  Jack watches him, still
moved by his experience, face full of intense empathy.

JACK (V.O.)
The big moosie, his eyes already shrink-wrapped in tears.  Knees
together, invisible steps.

Bob takes Jack into an embrace.

JACK (V.O.)
He pancaked down on top of me.

PG 6

BOB
Two grown kids ... and they won't return my calls.

JACK (V.O.)
Strangers with this kind of honesty make me go a big rubbery one.

Jack's face is rapt and sincere.  Bob stops talking and breaks into
sobbing, putting his head down on Jack's shoulder and completely
covering Jack's face.

JACK (V.O.)
Then, I was lost in oblivion -- dark and silent and complete.

Jack's body begins to jerk in sobs.  He tightens his arms around Bob.

JACK (V.O.)
This was freedom.  Losing all hope was freedom.

Jack pulls back from Bob.  On Bob's chest, there's a WET MASK of Jack's
face from how he looked weeping.

JACK (V.O.)
Babies don't sleep this well.

INT. JACKS' BEDROOM - NIGHT

Jack lies sound asleep.

JACK (V.O.)

I became addicted.

INT. SMALL PROTESTANT CHURCH - NIGHT

Jack moves into a "group hug" of sickly people, men and women.  In view
is a sign by the door "Free and Clear".

JACK (V.O.)
I felt more alive than I've ever felt.

INT. OFFICE BUILDING BASEMENT - NIGHT

Jack pulls back from a group hug of more sickly people.  They pair-off.

Jack stands with a weeping middle-aged WOMAN.  He gingerly takes her in
his arms, pats her back.  He begins to cry along with her.  In view is
a sign by the door:  "Onward and Upward".

PG 7

JACK (V.O.)
If I didn't say anything, people assumed the worst.  They cried harder.
 I cried harder.

INT. CATHOLIC CATHEDRAL - NIGHT

Jack is in an embrace with a YOUNG MAN.  They are both weeping.

JACK (V.O.)
I wasn't really dying.  I wasn't host to cancer or parasites; no, I was
the warm little center that the life of this world crowded around.

INT. PUBLIC BUILDING CONFERENCE ROOM - NIGHT

Everyone settles in their seats and a Leader takes the microphone.

LEADER
Okay, everyone, close your eyes.  Imagine your pain as a white ball of
healing light.  Go down your secret path to your cave and join up with
your power animal.

EXT. ENTRANCE OF CAVE (JACK'S IMAGINATION)

Jack walks up to the entrance and out comes a PENGUIN.  The penguin
looks at him, smiles.

PENGUIN
Slide.

EXT. STREET - NIGHT

Jack walks out of a doorway, saying goodbye to people.  He walks down
the sidewalk, his face shining with peace.

JACK (V.O.)
Every evening I died and every evening I was born.  Resurrected.

CUT BACK TO:

PG 8

INT. HIGH SCHOOL GYMNASIUM - *RESUMING*

Jack still hanging in an embrace with Bob.

JACK (V.O.)
Bob loved me because he thought my testicles were removed, too.  Being
there, my face against his tits, getting ready to cry -- this was my
vacation.

MARLA SINGER enters.  She has short matte black hair and big, dark eyes
like a character from Japanese animation.

MARLA
This is cancer, right?

She raises a cigarette to her lips.  The men gape at her, dumbfounded.

JACK (V.O.)
And *she* ruined everything.

CUT TO:

INT. HIGH SCHOOL GYMNASIUM - LATER

Everyone paired-off.  MOVE THROUGH ROOM  and catch snippets of
intimate, painful CONVERSATION.

FIND JACK'S FACE as it stares, over Bob's shoulder, eyes full of deep
hostility.

JACK (V.O.)
Liar.  Faker.  Liar.

MOVE THROUGH ROOM, hearing more CONVERSATION.

FIND MARLA'S FACE, over the shoulder of a MAN she's being embraced by,
SMOKING, blowing smoke rings.

JACK (V.O.)
This ... chick ... Marla Singer... did not have testicular cancer.  She
had no diseases.  She was a liar.  I saw her at "We Shall Overcome," my
melanoma group Monday night ...

INT. SMALL PROTESTANT CHURCH - NIGHT

Marla sits with the group, smoking, while a member speaks.  Jack glares
at her.

PG 9

INT. CATHOLIC CATHEDRAL - NIGHT

Everyone sits with eyes closed while a speaker takes them through a
meditation.  Various COUGHING around the room.  Jack's eyes open and he
glares at Marla.  Her eyes are closed and she's smoking a cigarette.

JACK (V.O.)
... at "Seize The Day," my tuberculosis group Friday night.

CUT BACK TO:

INT. HIGH SCHOOL GYMNASIUM - RESUMING

Jack continues to glare at Marla.  Her eyes briefly catch his, then
roll.  Another puff of the cigarette.

JACK (V.O.)
Marla -- the big tourist.  The faker.  With her there, I was a faker,
too.  Her lie reflected my lie.  And all of a sudden, I felt nothing. 
With her there, I couldn't cry.

INT. JACK'S BEDROOM - NIGHT

Jack, fully clothed, lies on top of his bed, holding a cordless phone
to his ear.  He stares at the ceiling and swats at a fly.

JACK (V.O.)
So, once again, I couldn't sleep.

Jack hears something on the phone.  He sits up.

JACK
I've been holding for thirty minutes.

Spread all over the floor by Jack's feet are INVOICES for CREDIT CARDS.

JACK
Yes, that's right.  Yes, but I transferred part of my balance to my
Visa to get the lower rate.  Oh, wait.  No, it wasn't your Visa.  Okay,
I transferred all of the MasterCard ... to ... (MORE)

PG 10

JACK (CONT'D)
Look, can I just come down in person?  I live here -- in Wilmington. 
Yes, all my credit cards have main headquarters here.  No?  Why not? 
Why can't I speak to an account rep?  No, wait, don't put me on --

Jack reacts to being put on hold.

INT. BATHROOM - MOMENTS LATER

Jack sits on the toilet.  He digs through a magazine rack.  IKEA
catalogues, Pottery Barn catalogues and more of the kind.  Jack opens
an IKEA catalog and flips through it.

JACK (V.O.)
I had become a slave to the IKEA nesting instinct.  If I saw something
like the clever Njurunda coffee tables in the shape of a lime green Yin
and an orange Yang --

Move in on PHOTO of the tables.  CUT TO:

INT. JACK'S LIVING ROOM - NIGHT

Completely EMPTY.

JACK (V.O.)
I had to have it.

The Njurunda tables APPEAR.

INSERT - PHOTO OF SOFAS

JACK (V.O.)
The Haparanda sofa group ...

INT. JACK'S LIVING ROOM - NIGHT

The sofa group APPEARS.

JACK (V.O.)
... with the orange slip covers by Erika Pekkari.  The Johanneshov
armchair in the Strinne green stripe pattern.

The armchair APPEARS.

PG 11

JACK (V.O.)
The Rislampa/Har lamps from wire and environmentally-friendly
unbleached paper.

The lamp APPEARS.

JACK (V.O.)
The Vild hall clock of galvanized steel.

The clock APPEARS.

JACK (V.O.)
The Klipsk shelving unit.

The shelving unit APPEARS.

INT. BATHROOM - RESUMING

Jack flips the page of the catalogue to reveal a full-page photo of an
entire kitchen and dining room set.

JACK (V.O.)
I would flip and wonder, "What kind of dining room set *defines* me as
a person?"

Jack drops the catalog down, open to this spread.  PAN OVER to the
magazine stack -- there's an old, tattered PLAYBOY.

JACK (V.O.)
It used to be Playboys; now -- IKEA.

INT. JACK'S KITCHEN AND DINING ROOM - CONTINUOUS

-- Looking exactly like the photo in the catalogue.  Jack walks in with
the cordless phone still glued to his ear.

JACK
I want to transfer my balance to get a lower interest rate.

Jack looks over the whole kitchen, dining room, and the living room
beyond.

JACK (V.O.)
The things you own, they end up owning you.

Jack opens a cabinet, takes out a plate.

PG 12

JACK (V.O.)
My hand-blown green glass dishes with the tiny bubbles and
imperfections, proof they were crafted by the honest, simple,
hard-working indigenous peoples of wherever.

He rummages through the refrigerator.  It's practically empty.  Jack
takes out a jar of mustard, opens it and uses a butter knife to eat it.

INT. BEDROOM - LATER

Jack lies on the bed, phone still at his ear.

JACK
I want to talk to a live person.

Jack reacts, listens, impatiently punches a single number; waits,
listens, punches another single number; listens.  He rolls over, looks
at one of the bills on the floor and punches an entire credit card
number.

JACK (V.O.)
Next support group, after guided meditation, the white healing ball of
light, after we open our chakras, when it comes time to hug, I'm going
to grab that little bitch, Marla Singer, squeeze her arms down against
her sides and say ...

JACK
Marla, you liar, you big tourist.  Get out.

Jack yawns, rubs his eyes.  They stay wide open.  He punches another
number into the phone.  He sees a LEVITATING, STEAMING Starbucks paper
coffee cup move from side to side in front of his face.

INT. COPY ROOM - DAY

Jack stands over a copy machine.  The Starbucks cup sits on the lid,
moving back and forth as the machine makes copies.

JACK (V.O.)
With insomnia, nothing is real.  Everything is far away.  Everything is
a copy of a copy of a copy.

Other people make copies, all with Starbucks cups, sipping.

PG 13

INT. OFFICE AREA - DAY

Floor-to-ceiling glass instead of walls.  Industrial low-pile gray
carpet.  Walls of upholstered plywood.  There are four small offices
connected by a hallway to one large office.

INT. JACK'S OFFICE - SAME

Jack, sipping from a Starbucks cup, stares blankly at his Starbucks bag
on the floor, full of newspapers.

JACK (V.O.)
When deep space exploitation ramps up, it will be corporations that
name everything.  The IBM Stellar Sphere.  The Philip Morris Galaxy. 
Planet Starbucks.

Jack looks up as a pudgy MAN in his late thirties, enters.  Starbucks
cup in hand, pulls up a chair, and slides a stack of reports on Jack's
desk.  He pats Jack's back in a superficially-friendly way.

PUDGY MAN
I'm going to need you out-of-town a little more this week.  We've got
some "red-flags" to cover.

JACK (V.O.)
It must've been Tuesday.  My Boss was wearing his cornflower-blue tie.

JACK (listless "management-speak")
You want me to de-prioritize my current reports until you advise of a
status upgrade?

PUDGY MAN - "BOSS"
You need to make these your primary "action items".

JACK (V.O.)
He was full of pep.  Must've had his latte enema.

BOSS
Here's your flight coupons.  Call me from the road if there's any
snags.  Your itinerary ...

Jack hides a yawn and pretends to listen.

PG 14

JACK (V.O.)
When you have insomnia, you're never really awake and you're never
really asleep, either.

INT. SMALL PROTESTANT CHURCH - NIGHT

Jack walks in and joins the crowd.

LEADER
Okay, everyone.  Chloe.

Jack catches sight of Marla, scowls at her.  Taking the lectern is
CHLOE, a pale, sickly girl whose skin stretches yellowish and tight
around her bones.  She wears a head bandage.  OVER the beginning of her
SPEECH:

JACK (V.O.)
Chloe looked the way Joni Mitchell's skeleton would look if you made it
smile and walk around a party being extra nice to everyone.

CHLOE
My status update is ... I'm still here -- but I don't know for how
long.  That's as much certainty as they can give me.  I'm in a pretty
lonely place.  No one will have sex with me.  I'm so close to death and
all I want is to get laid for the last time.  I have pornographic
movies in my apartment, and lubricants and amyl nitrate ...

The LEADER hardly knows what to do.  He inches his way to the lectern,
and gingerly takes control of the microphone.

LEADER
Thank you, Chloe.   Everyone, close your eyes for meditation.  Go to
your cave and find your power animal.

EXT. ENTRANCE OF CAVE (JACK'S IMAGINATION)

Jack walks up to the entrance and finds MARLA -- smoking a cigarette
blowing smoke into his face, rolling her eyes in condescension.

MARLA
Slide.

PG 15

INT. CHRUCH - RESUMING

Jack's eyes snap open and turn to Marla.  He glowers, watching her
smoke with her eyes closed.

INT. CHURCH - LATER

The Leader, smiling opens his eyes and looks around the group.

LEADER
Good.  Now.  Pair off for the one-on-one.  Pick someone special to you
tonight.

Everyone stands and mills about, slowly pairing-off.  Jack sees the
ghastly spectre of Chloe coming towards him.  He smiles at her.  She
smiles back; it takes her some time to amble to him.

CHLOE
Hello, Cornelius.

JACK (V.O.)
I never gave my real name at support groups.

CHLOE
I'm showing signs of improvement.

JACK (V.O.)
Everyone was always getting better.  They never said "parasite"; they
said "agent".

She smiles at him with a twisted, dying mouth.  Her eyes eerily bright
with desperation.  Jack's lip trembles as he, in a sincere attempt at
levity, chokes out:

JACK
You ... look ... like a pirate.

Chloe laughs, a little too much.  Jack squeezes out a laugh.  Then, he
sees Marla, off by herself.  Someone is heading for her.  Most people
have paired-off.  Jack gives a quick nod to Chloe and darts for Marla,
grabbing her.  Chloe watches in sad surprise.

STAY ON JACK AND MARLA as he drags her off to the periphery.  He
whispers into her ear.

JACK
We need to talk.

PG 16

MARLA
O - *kay*.  Sure.

JACK
You're a faker.  You aren't dying.  Okay, in the brainy brain-food
philosophy way, we're all dying.  But you're not dying the way Chloe is
dying.

LEADER
Tell the other person how you feel.

MARLA
You're not dying, either ...
(reading his nametag)
... *Cornelius*.

LEADER
Share yourself completely.

JACK
These are my groups.  I found them!

MARLA
I saw you practicing this.

JACK
What?

MARLA
-- Telling me off.  Is it going as well as you thought it would?

JACK
I'll expose you!

MARLA
Go ahead.

MEDIATOR
Let yourself cry.

Marla puts her head down on Jack's shoulder as if she were crying. 
Jack pulls her head back up.  She deadpans at him.

JACK
I've put in some serious time on these groups -- I've been coming for a
year.

MARLA
Must've been tough to pull off.

PG 17

JACK
Anyone who might've noticed me in that time has either died or
recovered and never come back.

MARLA
Why do you do it?

JACK
Why do you?

No answer.  The Leader passes right by Jack and Marla.

LEADER
Open up.  share with each other.

JACK
... If people think you're dying, they really listen, instead of just
waiting for their turn to speak.  Everything else about credit card
debts and sad radio songs and thinning hair goes out the window.

MARLA
It started with a lump.  I went to a breast cancer support group.  The
lump turned out benign.  But I still needed my Monday fix.  So, I went
to lymphoma, just to check it out.  Dying people are so *alive*.

JACK
It becomes an addiction.

MARLA
Yeah ...

Jack almost smiles, then turns sullen.  He pulls back from her.

LEADER
Now, the closing prayer.

JACK
Look, I can't go to a group with a faker present.

Marla's mood hardens.

MARLA
Well, I can't either.

LEADER
Oh, bless us and hold us ...

PG 18

JACK
We'll split up the week.

Marla starts out of the room.  Jack follows her.

LEADER
... help us and help us.

EXT. CHURCH - NIGHT - CONTINUOUS

Marla gets to the sidewalk, moving quickly along.

JACK
You can have lymphoma, tuberculosis and --

MARLA
No, you take tuberculosis.  My smoking doesn't go over well.

JACK
I think testicular cancer should be no contest.

MARLA
You have your balls, don't you?  Technically, *I* have more of a right
to be there than you.

JACK
You're kidding.

MARLA
I don't know -- am I?

Jack follows Marla into 

INT. LAUNDROMAT - CONTINUOUS

As she walks with authority up to an unwatched DRYER.  She takes out
all the clothes, sets them on a table and sorts through them, picking
out jeans, pants and shirts.

MARLA
I'll take the parasites.

JACK
You can't have *both* parasites.  You take blood parasites and --

MARLA
I want brain parasites.

She opens another dryer and does the same thing again.

PG 19

JACK
Okay.  I'll take blood parasites and I'll take organic brain dementia
and --

MARLA
I want that.

JACK
You can't have the whole brain!

MARLA
So far, you have four and I have two!

JACK
Well, then, take blood parasites.  Now, we each have three.

Marla gathers up all the chosen garments and heads back for the door. 
She whooshes past Jack.

EXT. SIDEWALK - CONTINUOUS

Jack follows, bewildered.

JACK
You left half your clothes.

HONK!  Jack starts.  Marla's led him into the street with traffic
barreling down.  She defiantly stomps in front of the cars, which
screech to a halt and blare their horns.  Jack dashes across.  Marla
heads into a THRIFT STORE.  Jack follows.

INT. THRIFT STORE - CONTINUOUS

Marla drops all the clothes on a back counter.  An old CLERK sifts
through the clothes, marks on a pad.

JACK
What are you doing?  You're selling those clothes?

Marla steps down hard on Jack's foot.  He jerks, wincing in pain.

MARLA (for the Clerk to hear)
Yes, I'm selling some clothes.

The Clerk starts to ring up the various amounts he's assessed.

PG 20

MARLA
So, we each have three -- that's six.  What about the seventh day?  I
want ascending bowel cancer.

JACK (V.O.)
The girl had done her homework.

JACK
*I* want ascending bowel cancer.

The Clerk gives Marla and Jack a strange look as he hands over money to
Marla.

MARLA
That's your favorite, too?  Tried to slip it by me, huh?

JACK
We'll split it.  You get it the first and third Sunday of the month.

MARLA
Deal.

They shake hands.  Jack starts to withdraw his; Marla holds it.

MARLA
I guess this is goodbye.

JACK
Let's not make a big deal out of this.

She walks toward the door.  Jack watches her go.

MARLA (not looking back)
How's this for not making a big deal?

EXT. SIDEWALK - CONTINUOUS

Jack dashes out and catches up to her.

JACK
Uh, Marla.  Should we exchange phone numbers?

MARLA
Should we?

JACK
In case we want to switch nights.

PG 21

MARLA
Uh-hunh.  Sure.

He takes out a business card and a pen.  He writes his home number on
the back and hands it to her.  She takes his pen, grabs his hand and
writes her number on his palm.  She gives him a quick grin, slaps the
pen back into his palm, then saunters out into the middle of the
street, causing more screeching of tires and honking.  She turns back,
holding up the card.

MARLA
It doesn't have your name on it.  Who are you?  Cornelius?  Any of the
stupid names you give at group?

Jack starts to yell, but the traffic noise is too loud.  Marla just
shakes her head at him, turns, and keeps moving away.  A bus moves into
view and stops, obscuring her.

JACK (V.O.)
Marla's philosophy of life, I later found out, was that she could die
at any moment.  The tragedy of her life was that she didn't.

INT. AIRPLANE CABIN - DAY

As the plane touches down for landing and the cabin BUMPS, Jack's eyes
pop open.

JACK (V.O.)
You wake up at O'Hare.

INT. AIRPLANE CABIN - DAY 

Jack snaps awake again, looking around, disoriented.

JACK (V.O.)
You wake up at SeaTac.

EXT. HIGHWAY - DUSK

The rear end of a car is visible sticking up by the side of the road. 
Jack stands near the car, marking on a document.  The SUN SETS behind
him.

INT. AIRPORT - NIGHT

Jack walks up to a gate counter.  An ATTENDANT smiles at him.

ATTENDANT
Check-in for that flight doesn't begin for another two hours, Sir.

PG 22

Jack looks at his watch, steps away and looks at an overhanging clock. 
His eyes are bleary as he reads it, adjusts his watch.

JACK (V.O.)
Pacific, Mountain, Central.  You lose an hour, you gain an hour.  This
is your life, and it's ending one minute at a time.

INT. AIRPLANE CABIN - DAY

Jack's eyes snap open as the plane LANDS.

JACK (V.O.)
You wake up at Air Harbor International.

INT. AIRPORT WALKWAY

Jack stands on a conveyor belt, briefcase at his feet, moving slowly
with the flow of the belt.  His tired eyes watch people on the opposite
conveyor belt, moving past him.

JACK (V.O.)
If you wake up at a different time and a different place, can you be a
different person?

Jack's eyes catch sight of TYLER -- who we recognize from the opening
sequence -- on the opposite conveyor belt.  They pass each other.

INT. AIRPLANE CABIN - IN FLIGHT - NIGHT

Jack sits next to a BUSINESSMAN.  As they have idle CONVERSATION, we
MOVE IN ON Jack's fold-out tray.

An ATTENDANT'S HANDS set coffee down with a small packet of sugar and a
small container of cream.

JACK (V.O.)
The charm of traveling is: everywhere I go -- tiny life. 
Single-serving sugar, single-serving cream.

CUT TO: The hands place a plastic dinner tray down.  Jack opens the
various containers.

JACK (V.O.)
Single-serving butter, single-serving salt.  Single-serving cordon
blue.

PG 23

INT. HOTEL ROOM - BATHROOM - NIGHT

Jack brushes his teeth.

JACK (V.O.)
Single-use toothbrush.  Single-serving mouthwash, single serving soap.

Jack picks up an individual, wrapped Q-TIP, looks at it.  He moves out
of the bathroom into

MAIN AREA

And sits on the bed.  He turns on the television.  It's tuned to the
"Sheraton Channel" and shows WAITERS serving people in a large BANQUET
ROOM.  Jack stops brushing his teeth, feels something near him on the
bed, finds it, lifts it.  It's a small MINT.

INT. AIRPLANE CABIN - IN FLIGHT - NIGHT

Jack sits next to a frumpy WOMAN and they chat.  Jack turns to look at
his food and takes a bite.  He turns back and it's

-- a BALD MAN sitting next to him, talking.  He takes another bite,
turns back and it's

-- a BUSINESSMAN sitting next to him.  He takes another bite, turns
back, and it's 

-- a BUSINESS WOMAN sitting next to him.

JACK (V.O.)
The people I meet on each flight -- they're single-serving *friends*. 
Between take-off and landing, we have our time together, then we never
see each other again.

INT. AIRPLANE CABIN - LANDING

Jack's eyes snap open.

JACK (V.O.)
You wake up at Logan.

EXT. CONCRETE LOT - DAY

Surrounded by cinderblock walls.  Two TECHNICIANS in uniform lead Jack
to a WAREHOUSE door.  They open it, revealing a BURNT-OUT SHELL of a
WRECKED AUTOMOBILE.  They move into the

PG 24

INT. WAREHOUSE - CONTINUOUS

And Jack sets down his briefcase, opens it, and starts to make notes on
a FORM.

JACK (V.O.)
I'm a recall coordinator.  My job was to apply the formula.  It's
simple arithmetic.

TECHNICIAN #1
Here's where the baby went through the window.  Three points.

JACK (V.O.)
It's a story problem.  A new car built by my company leaves Boston
traveling at 60 miles per hour.  The rear differential locks up.

TECHNICIAN #2
The teenager's braces locked around the backseat ashtray.  Kind makes a
good "anti-smoking" ad.

JACK (V.O.)
The car crashes and burns with everyone trapped inside.  Now: do we
initiate a recall?

TECHNICIAN #1
The father must've been obese.  See how the fat burned into the
driver's seat, mixed with the dye of his shirt?  Kind like modern art.

JACK (V.O.)
You take the number of vehicles in the field (A) and multiply it by the
probable rate of failure (B), multiply the result by the average
out-of-court settlement (C).  A times B times C equals X.  If X is less
than the cost of a recall, we don't do one.

INT. AIRPLANE CABIN - TAKING OFF - NIGHT

Next to Jack, a chubby, middle-aged LADY gawks at him, appalled.

LADY
... Which ... car company do you work for?

PG 25

JACK
A major one.

LADY
Oh.

Jack turns his attention to the window as the PLANE ASCENDS.  The
lady's VOICE FADES.  Jack sees a PELICAN get SUCKED into the TURBINE. 
His face remains bland during the following:

The plane BUCKLES -- the cabin wobbles loosely.  People begin to panic.
 Oxygen masks fall.

JACK (V.O.)
Life insurance pays off triple if you die on a business trip.

A forceful IMPACT with the ground and people -- except for Jack --
LURCH FORWARD, some jerking against their seatbelts, magazines and
other objects fly forward.

JACK (V.O.)
No more expense accounts, receipt required for over twenty-five
dollars.

A BALL OF FIRE swoops forward from the rear of the cabin and
INCINERATES EVERYTHING AND EVERYBODY -- except Jack, who remains in his
same position in his seat, with the bland expression.

JACK (V.O.)
No more haircuts.  Nothing matters, not even bad breath.

DING! -- the seatbelt light goes OUT.

*EVERYTHING IS NORMAL*.

JACK (V.O.)
Always the same fantasy.  But -- no such luck.

Jack's eyes are closed.  He seems asleep.  From next to him, a VOICE
we've heard before.

VOICE
There are three ways to make napalm.  One, mix equal parts of gasoline
and frozen orange juice.

PG 26

Jack's eyes snap open and he turns to see *Tyler*, who is staring out
the window.  Without turning to Jack, he continues:

TYLER
Two, mix equal parts of gasoline and diet cola.  Three, dissolve
crumbled cat litter in gasoline until the mixture is thick.

Jack's smile fades.  Tyler turns to him and grins.  He reaches down
under the seat in front of him and pulls up a briefcase.  Jack looks at
it with trepidation.

JACK (V.O.)
This is how I met --

Tyler offers his hand, Jack takes it and Tyler squeezes firmly and
shakes hands.

TYLER
Tyler Durden.  You know why they have oxygen masks on planes?

JACK
Supply oxygen?

TYLER
That's a sharp answer.  The oxygen gets you high.  You're taking in
giant, panicked breaths and, suddenly, you become euphoric and docile,
and you accept your fate.

Tyler grabs a safety instruction card from the seat pocket and shows
Jack the passive faces on the drawn figures.  Tyler imitates the face. 
Jack laughs; he is completely beguiled.

JACK
What do you do, Tyler?

TYLER
What do you want me to do?

JACK 
I mean -- for a living.

TYLER
Why?  So you can say, "Oh, *that's* what you do."  -- And be a smug
little shit about it?

Jack laughs.  He points to his own briefcase, under the seat in front
of him.

PG 27

JACK
We have the same briefcase.

Tyler pops the latches on his briefcase.  A beat, while Jack's
expression turns nervous again about what's inside.  Tyler swings the
lid up, revealing a full bounty of quaintly-wrapped bars of soap.

TYLER
I make and sell soap.

He gives Jack one.  Jack takes it, looks it over.

TYLER
If you add nitric acid to the soap-making process, you get
nitroglycerin.  With enough soap, you could blow up the world.

Jack now looks at the bar of soap nervously.  He looks at Tyler, slowly
smiles and shakes his head.

Tyler takes out a blank BOARDING PASS.  He takes out a small stencil,
scrapes a pencil over it, creating a seat number which looks printed. 
Then, he takes out a stamp and ink pad.  He stamps the pass.

JACK
Uh ... why are you going to Wilmington?

TYLER
I live there.

JACK
Me, too.

Tyler shuts his briefcase and stands.

TYLER
Excuse me.

Jack stands, allowing Tyler to pass into the aisle.

JACK
So, uh ... we should hook up sometime.

Jack hands Tyler a business card.  Tyler snatches it, writes down a
number, hands it back to Jack.

JACK
Tyler, you're by far the most interesting "single-serving" friend I've
ever met.

PG 28

A beat as Tyler stares at him, deadpan.  Jack, enjoying his own chance
to be witty, leans a bit closer to Tyler.

JACK
You see, when you travel, everything is --

TYLER
I grasp the concept.  You're very clever.

JACK
Thank you.

TYLER
How's that working out for you?  -- Being clever.

JACK (thrown off)
Well, uh ... uh ... great.

TYLER
Keep it up, then.  Keep it right up.

Jack sits and watches Tyler walk up to the curtain dividing First
Class.  Tyler show the bogus boarding pass to an ATTENDANT, who leads
him through the curtain.

INT. BAGGAGE CLAIM AREA - WILMINGTON - NIGHT

Utterly empty of baggage, and, except for Jack and a SECURITY TASK
FORCE MAN, utterly empty of people; quiet.  The Security TFM, smirking,
holds a receiver to his ear from an official phone on the wall.

SECURITY TFM (to Jack)
Throwers don't worry about ticking.  Modern bombs don't tick.

JACK
Throwers?

SECURITY TFM
Baggage handlers.  But when a suitcase vibrates, the throwers have to
call the police.

JACK
My suitcase was *vibrating*?

PG 29

SECURITY TFM
Nine times out of ten, it's an electric razor.  One out of ten, it's a
dildo.  Sometimes it's even a *man*.  It's airline policy not to imply
ownership in the event of a dildo.  We gotta use the indefinite
article:  "*A* dildo".  Never "*Your* dildo".

JACK (V.O.)
I had everything in that bag.  Six white shirts, two black trousers,
six pair underwear, alarm clock, contact lens stuff, and ... cordless
electric razor.

SECURITY TFM (into phone)
Yeah?  Oh, fuck, now a recording.

The Security TFM punches a few code numbers into the phone, waits.  CUT
TO:

EXT. EMPTY RUNWAY - NIGHT

A solitary SUITCASE sits on the concrete.

KABOM!  The suitcase explodes.  CUT TO:

INT. BAGGAGE CLAIM AREA - RESUMING

The Security TFM still on hold, entertains Jack.

SECURITY TFM (to Jack)
You know the industry slang for "flight attendant"?  "Air Mattress".
(into phone)
Yeah?  Really?

The Security TFM, turns to Jack, shakes his head, hangs up the phone;
shrugs.

EXT. AIRPORT DRIVE - MOMENTS LATER

Jack waits by the curb as a TAXI approaches.

JACK (V.O.)
Things could be worse.  A spider could lay eggs under the skin in your
face and the larva could tunnel around and baby spiders could burst
from your nostrils.

PG 30

INT. TAXI - MOVING - NIGHT

Along a residential street.  Jack looks ahead, sees a tall grey, bland
building on the corner.

JACK (V.O.)
Home was a condo on the fifteenth floor of a filing cabinet for widows
and young professionals.

The taxi approaches the intersection.

JACK (V.O.)
The walls were solid concrete.  A foot of concrete is important when
your next-door neighbor lets her hearing aid go and has to watch game
shows at full blast ...

The taxi turns a corner and Jack sees the front of the building.  A
diffuse CLOUD of SMOKE wafts away from a BLOWN-OUT SECTION on the
fifteenth floor.  FIRETRUCKS, POLICECARS and a MOB are all crowded
around the lobby area.

JACK (V.O.)
-- Or when a volcanic blast of burning gas and debris that used to be
your furniture and personal effects blows out your floor-to-ceiling
window and sails down flaming to leave just your condo -- only yours --
a gutted, charred concrete hole in the cliffside of the building.

EXT. STREET IN FRONT OF BUILDING

Jack, gaping at the sight above him, absently gives the Cabbie money. 
The taxi pulls away.  Jack stands frozen.

JACK (V.O.)
These things happen.

Jack starts toward the building.  He enters the fray of people, pushes
through to the lobby.  The DOORMAN sees him, gives a sad smile, shakes
his head.  Jack starts for the elevator.

DOORMAN
There's nothing up there.

Jack presses the button; waits.  The Doorman moves next to him.

PG 31

DOORMAN
You can't go into the unit.  Police orders.  They're investigating for
arson.

The elevator doors open.  Jack hesitates.  The doors close.

DOORMAN
Do you have someone you can call?

Jack heads back for the lobby doors.  The Doorman follows.

EXT. CONDO BUILDING - CONTINUOUS

Jack walks past SMOKING, CHARRED DEBRIS -- a flash of ORANGE  from the
Yang table, a CLOCK FACE from the hall clock, part of an arm from the
GREEN ARMCHAIR.  His feet CRUNCH glass.  He gets to a payphone.  The
Doorman stays right with him, watching him.  CUT TO:

CLOSE SHOT - JACK'S STOVE

Hissing.

JACK (V.O.)
Later, the police told me someone could've turned the pilot light off,
turned a burner on.

EXT. PAYPHONE - RESUMING

Jack picks up the receiver, stares at the numbers on the phone.

DOORMAN
A lot of young people try to impress the world and buy too many things.

CLOSE SHOT - JACK'S ENTIRE CONDO - KITCHEN AND LIVING ROOM

Sound of the HISS.

JACK (V.O.)
The gas then could have slowly filled the condo from floor to ceiling
in every room.  Seventeen-hundred square feet with high ceilings for
days and days.

PG 32

EXT. PAYPHONE - RESUMING

Jack's fingers move over the numbers lightly, as he thinks.

DOORMAN
A lot of young people don't know what they really want.

INSERT - CLOSE ON BASE OF JACK'S REFRIGERATOR

JACK (V.O.)
Then, the refrigerator's compressor clicked on.

Click.  KABLAM!  SCREEN GOES WHITE.

EXT. PAYPHONE - RESUMING

Jack digs into his pocket, pulls out his business card, turns it over
-- sees the number Tyler wrote.  He dials it.  Its rings ... and rings.
 He waits.

JACK (V.O.)
Tyler Durden.  Rescue me.

DOORMAN
Young people think they want the whole world.

JACK (V.O.)
Deliver me from Swedish furniture.  Deliver me from clever art.

DOORMAN
If you don't know what you want, you end up with a lot you don't.

JACK (V.O.)
May I never be content.  May I never be complete.  May I never be
perfect.  Deliver me.

Jack sighs and hands up the phone.  He starts to push past the Doorman
when the phone RINGS.  Jack grabs it.

JACK
Hello?

TYLER'S VOICE
Who's this?

JACK
Tyler?

PG 33

EXT. LOU'S TAVERN - NIGHT

A small building, sitting squarely in the middle of a large concrete
parking lot.  A few street lamps illuminate the lot.  a freeway runs
nearby.

INT. LOU'S TAVERN - SAME

Jack and Tyler sit at a table in the very back of the room.  A
half-empty pitcher of beer shows dried foam scum from the previous
refill.

Five DRUNKEN GUYS at a table at the opposite side of the bar keep
glancing over and chuckling in a potentially hostile manner.

TYLER
You buy furniture.  You tell yourself, this is the last sofa you'll
ever need in your life; no matter what else goes wrong, you've got the
sofa issue handled.  Then the right set of dishes.  Then the right bed.
 The drapes.  The rug.  This is how you're good to yourself.  This is
how you fill up your life.

JACK
I ... guess so.

TYLER
And now your condo blows up and you have nothing.

JACK 
I ... guess so.

TYLER
And now you find yourself, sitting here, feeling like it's the best
thing that ever happened to you.

JACK
... yeah.

TYLER
I don't know you, so maybe I'm wrong.  Maybe it's a terrible fucking
tragedy.

JACK 
... no.

PG 34

TYLER
I mean, you lost a lot of nice, perfect, neat little shit.

JACK
Fuck it all.

TYLER
Wow.  That's pretty strong.

JACK
... yeah.

TYLER
Do you have family you can call?

JACK
My mother would just go into hysterics.  My Dad ...  Don't know where
he is.  Only knew him for six years.  Then, he ran off to a new city
and married another woman and had more kids.  Every six years -- new
city, new family.  He was setting up franchises.

Tyler smiles, snorts, shakes his head.

TYLER
A generation of men raised by women.  Look what it's done to you.

JACK
To me?

TYLER
We're on our third pitcher of beer and you still can't ask me.

JACK
Huh?

TYLER
Why don't you cut the shit and ask me if you can stay at my place?

JACK
Well ... uh ...

TYLER
Why don't you cut the shit and ask me if you can stay at my place?

JACK
Would that be a problem?

PG 35

TYLER
Is it a problem for you to ask me?

JACK
Can I stay at your place?

TYLER
Yeah.

JACK
Thanks.

TYLER
-- If you do me one favor.

JACK
What's that?

TYLER
I want you to hit me as hard as you can.

*FREEZE PICTURE*

JACK (V.O.)
Let me tell you a little bit about Tyler Durden.

EXTREME CLOSE-UP - FILM FRAME

--And we can see it's a PENIS.

INT. PROJECTIONIST ROOM - THEATRE - NIGHT

Jack, in the foreground, FACES CAMERA.  In the BACKGROUND, Tyler sits
at a bench, looking at individual FRAMES that have been cut out of
movies.  Near him, the PROJECTOR rolls a film.

JACK
Tyler works some nights as a projectionist.  A film doesn't come in one
big reel ...

Tyler speaks to Jack normally, not to the camera.

TYLER
In an old theatre, two projectors are used.  I have to change
projectors at the exact second so the audience never sees the break
when one reel starts and one reel runs out.  You can see two dots on
screen at the end of a reel -- this is the warning.

PG 36

JACK
He splices single frames of genitalia from porno movies into family
films.

TYLER
One-twenty-forth of a second.  That's how long the penis flashes up
there.  Towering, slippery, red and terrible, and no one knows they've
seen it.

Jack and Tyler watch the audience of PARENTS and CHILDREN as an ANIMAL
adventure MOVIE plays.  Suddenly, children start becoming uncomfortable
and squirming.  Some start CRYING.  Some THROW UP.

JACK
Tyler also worked as a ...

INT. LARGE BANQUET HALL - NIGHT

Tyler moves the cart around one of many tables, ladling out soup.

Jack stands in the same position.  FACING CAMERA.

JACK
... banquet waiter at the luxurious Pressman Hotel.

The GUESTS are dressed in resplendent clothes, reeking of wealth and
privilege.  They command the WAITERS with snaps of the finger. 
Complaints pop like gunshots.  The stiff-necked CATERING MANAGER
contemptuously hawk-eyes the waiters.  It's hellish.

INT. SERVICE ELEVATOR - NIGHT

Jack turns and WE PAN to Tyler, standing by a CART with a giant SOUP
TUREEN and bowls.  His hands are at his open fly and he's in position
to piss into the soup.

TYLER
Don't watch.  I can't if you watch me.

CAMERA PANS to original position as Jack continues TO CAMERA.

JACK
He was a guerrilla terrorist of the food service industry.

TYLER (O.S.)
Shit.  I can't go.

PG 37

After a beat, the sound of WATER SPLASHING the floor.  Jack peeks and
sees Tyler pouring out a water glass with one hand, the other hand at
his crotch.

TYLER
... Oh, yeah.  *Oh*, yeah.

Jack turns back TO CAMERA.

JACK
He farted on creme brulee; he sneezed on braised endive; and, with
creme of mushroom soup, he ... he ...

TYLER (O.S.)
Go ahead.  Say it.

JACK
Well, you get the idea.

EXT. PARKING LOT OF TAVERN - RESUMING

Tyler and Jack come out of the bar; Jack shakes his head.

JACK
What?

TYLER
Hit me as hard as you can.

Tyler leads Jack into an open area, lit by a streetlamp.

JACK
I don't know about this, Tyler.

TYLER
I don't know either.  I want to find out.  We're virgins.  Neither one
of us has ever been hit.

JACK
You've never been in a fight?

TYLER
I didn't say that.  I said I've never been hit.

JACK
That's good, isnt' it?

TYLER
Listen to me -- hit me.  You're the only one I ever asked.

PG 38

JACK
Me?

Jack stares at him.  The five drunken GUYS -- the same ones who stared
at them earlier -- have formed a distant perimeter, sensing a fight. 
Jack glances at them, then back at Tyler.

JACK
I've ... never hit anyone in my life.

TYLER
Go crazy.  Let it rip.

JACK
Where do you want it?  In the face or the stomach?

TYLER
Surprise me.

Jack swings a wide, clumsy roundhouse that connects with Tyler's neck. 
It makes a dull, soft flat sound.  Tyler's neck turns red.

JACK
Shit.  Sorry.  That didn't count.  Let me try again.

TYLER
Like hell.  That counted.

Tyler shoots out a straight punch to Jack's chest.  The impact makes a
dull, barely-audible sound and Jack falls back against a car.  The Guys
whoop and clap, moving closer.  Jack's eyes involuntarily well up with
tears.  He and Tyler breathe HEAVILY and sprout BEADS of SWEAT on their
faces.

TYLER
How do you feel?

JACK
Strange.

TYLER
But a *good* strange.

JACK
Is it?

TYLER
We've crossed the threshold.

PG 39

JACK
... I guess so.

TYLER
You want to call it off?

JACK
Call what off?

TYLER
The fight.

JACK
*What* fight?

TYLER
I'm tired of watching only professionals.  I don't want to die without
any scars.  How much can you really know about yourself if you never go
at it, one-on-one?

JACK
Tyler ...

TYLER
Are you a pussy?

Jack swings another roundhouse that slams right under Tyler's ear.  The
sound, soft and flat.  Tyler punches Jack in the stomach.  The Guys
move closer, cheering the fight.  Tyler and Jack move clumsily,
throwing punches.  They breathe heavier, their eyes red and bright. 
They drool saliva and blood.  They each hurt badly and become dizzier
from every impact.

JACK (V.O.)
If you've never been in a fight, you wonder about getting hurt, about
what you're capable of doing against another man.

Tyler and Jack keep fighting.  The guys mix laughter with their cheers,
looking at each other in wondrous amusement.

EXT. CURBSIDE - LATER

Jack and Tyler sit on the curb, staring at the sparse headlights on the
nearby freeway.  Their eyes are glazed with endorphin-induced serenity.
 They look at each other.  Laugh.  Look away.

TYLER
What were you fighting?

PG 40

JACK
My job.  My boss, who fiddles with my DOS execute commands.  Marla, at
my support groups.  Everything that's broken and doesn't work in my
life.  What were you fighting?

TYLER
My father.

A pause as Jack studies Tyler's face.

JACK
We should do this again sometime.

Tyler cracks a smile, gives a sidelong glance to Jack, then returns his
stare to the night sky.

EXT. PAPER STREET - NIGHT

A street sign: "PAPER STREET".  An abandoned PAPER MILL  sits on one
side and only ONE HOUSE on the other, the rest of the land being
undeveloped grass and weeds.  It's an old, grand, three-story gone to
seed.  It looks abandoned, too.

INT. PAPER ST. HOUSE - LIVING ROOM -SAME

Tyler leads Jack up a staircase to a 2ND FLOOR LANDING, then opens the
door to a room.

INT. ROOM - CONTINUOUS

Jack steps into the room, sits down on the old bed.  It CREAKS.  Dust
drifts upward.

JACK (V.O.)
I don't know how Tyler found the house.  He'd been there for half a
year.  It was waiting for re-zoning or something.

CUT TO:

EXT. LOU'S TAVERN PARKING LOT - NIGHT

LONG SHOT - ZOOMING OUT - A group of SIX GUYS watching TWO GUYS in a
fist fight.  CUT TO:

INT. PAPER ST. HOUSE - KITCHEN - MORNING

Jack, his face showing new bruises and cuts, his knuckles puffy, shoos
away cockroaches as he makes coffee with a wire-mesh strainer.  He has
a happy little smile.

PG 41

JACK (V.O.)
Nothing worked.  The rusty plumbing leaked.  Turning on a light meant
that another light in the house went out.  The stairs were ready to
collapse.

CUT TO:

EXT. CONVENIENCE STORE PARKING LOT - NIGHT

LONG SHOT - ZOOMING OUT - Resuming from previous shot, getting further
away, but now with TEN GUYS around two guys fighting.  CUT TO:

INT. SHOWER - MORNING

Jack, showing some new bruises, with even fatter knuckles, turns on the
water.  LOUD VIBRATION  from the walls.  Water spits in starts, then
dribbles out.  CUT TO:

INT. KITCHEN - MORNING

Tyler, in a nice suit, checks over the bars of soap in his briefcase,
then shuts it.  Jack walks in, dressed in his work clothes.  He picks
up a battered old saucepan with boiling coal-black coffee and sips.  He
offers it to Tyler, who sips.  Jack pulls a TOOTH out of his mouth and
throws it into the sink.  They both walk out the door.

EXT. CINEMA PARKING LOT - NIGHT

LONG SHOT - ZOOMING OUT - Resuming from previous shot, getting further
away, but now with FOURTEEN GUYS around a fight.  CUT TO:

EXT. PORCH - NIGHT

Tyler, in his waiter uniform, sits next to Jack on the lip of the
porch.  They both have newer, different bruises and cuts, sit and
guzzle beer.  THUNDERCLAPS.  RAIN begins to fall.  Tyler gets to his
feet.

INT. BASEMENT - SAME

Tyler and Jack are knee-deep in water, standing by a FUSEBOX.  Tyler
opens it.  He grabs two breaker switches, waits for Jack.  Jack grabs
two other switches,  apparently, they have to do this in a certain
order.  Tyler flips his switches, then Jack flips his.  CUT TO:

EXT. CONSTRUCTION AREA - NIGHT

LONG SHOT - ZOOMING OUT - Resuming from previous shot, getting further
away, but now with EIGHTEEN GUYS around a fight.  CUT TO:

PG 42

INT. LIVING ROOM - NIGHT

Rain DRIPS from the ceiling -- some of it from LIGHT FIXTURES.  Tyler
and Jack enter with LIT CANDLES.  They sit down on the decrepit,
buckled wood floor.  There's not one item of furniture in the room. 
There are, however, THOUSANDS of MAGAZINES.

JACK (V.O.)
The previous occupant collected magazines.

They each pick up an opened magazine and resume reading, adjusting
close to the candles.

Tyler lies down next to him, setting his candle next to Jack's.  Tyler
picks up a magazine.

TYLER
What are your reading?

JACK
"I Am Joe's Lungs".  It's written in first person.  "Without me, Joe
could not take in oxygen to feed his red blood cells".

TYLER
Sounds fascinating.

JACK
It's a whole series -- "I Am Joe's Prostate".

TYLER
"I get cancer, and I kill Joe".

JACK
What are you reading?

TYLER
Soldier of Fortune,  National Geographic.  New Republic.  Forbes.

JACK 
Show-off.

JACK (V.O.)
Every Wednesday night, after fighting like wild animals, we were too
wired to go to sleep.

PG 43

INT. CONFERENCE ROOM - DAY

In near DARKNESS as a SLIDE SHOW progresses, run by a chipper salesman,
WALTER.  Jack sits, deadpan, with a PUFFY LIP and a BRUISE on his
cheek.

JACK (V.O.)
Thursday morning, my Boss didn't know what to think.

Boss blocks him from the rest of the room, gives him a dubious look,
turns back to Walter.

JACK (V.O.)
And all I could do was think about next week.

Walter advances to the next slide, showing a view of a COMPUTER SCREEN.

WALTER
The basic premise of microsofting your office is -- make things more
efficient.

As Walter continues, his sales pitched gets drowned out by Jack's
narration:

JACK (V.O.)
Walter, the Microsoft account exec, smiled at me with his steam shovel
jaw.  Walter, with his smooth, soft hands.  Here he was, doing his cute
little show.  Maybe thinking about a free-range potluck he'd been to
last weekend, but probably not.

Walter moves to Jack and slaps his shoulder.

WALTER
I showed this already to my man here.  You liked it, didn't you?

Slowly, Jack smiles.  His teeth are RED with BLOOD.  They GLOW eerily
in the dim light.

JACK (V.O.)
You can swallow a pint of blood before you get sick.

WALTER
Jeez, I'd hate to see what happened to the other guy.

Jack keeps the smile frozen on his face.

PG 44

JACK (V.O.)
Fuck Walter.  His candy ass wouldn't last a second in fight club.

EXT. LOU'S TAVERN - NIGHT
Out of silent darkness, HEADLIGHTS appear from all directions.  A
synchronous WAVE of cars PULLS UP and parks in the already-filled lot. 
Young men get out of the arriving cars and wander into the tavern.  We
recognize, among them, the GUYS who watched Tyler and Jack's *first
fight*.

INT. LOU'S TAVERN - SAME

The men enter; the bartender, IRVINE, calls out:

IRVINE
Drink up people.  We're closing.  Let's go.

The crowd consists of men and women YUPPIES: blue collar REGULARS
dressed in work clothes or like cowboys; floozy barfly WOMEN.  MUSIC
plays from the jukebox.

The arriving men simply wait.  And wait.  Tyler and Jack enter.  They,
too, stand back against he wall.

The waiting army begins to share secret looks and grins.  A certain
level of eagerness can be seen among them.

Irvine looks at Jack and grins.  He flips on LIGHTS.  The drunken
customers squint and get the message.  They gulp down their drinks,
plop down money and filter out the door.  Irvine hits a button and the
jukebox loses  power -- the record simply turns slower until it stops
revolving.

Finally, the last of the irritated customers leaves.  One guy locks the
door.  Two other guys pull down blinds.  Someone else moves over to the
BASEMENT DOOR and opens it.

INT. BASEMENT STEPS - MOMENTS LATER

The grinning men march down steps; CHATTER begins.

TALL GUY
I brought my roommate tonight.  Phil.

FAT GUY
Oh, yeah?  Hi, Phil.

TALL GUY
He kept seeing what I looked like.  Had to check it out.

PG 45

INT. TAVERN BASEMENT - SAME

A BOMB-SHELTER -- concrete floor, concrete walls.  One BARE LIGHT BULB
hangs by a wire from the ceiling.  Tyler nods to Jack and Jack turns on
the light.  The guys mill around, finding partners.  The whole mood is
very friendly.  Everyone brims with eagerness, but tries to act cool
about it.  CHATTER gets LOUDER.

FAT GUY
A mean uppercut.

WIRY GUY
I gotta work on my left.

SHORT GUY
*He's* got a left.

FAT GUY
Hey, you're wiping the floor with dudes who are way out of your weight
class.

TALL GUY (slapping Wiry Guy's shoulder)
Skinny guys.  They fight till they're burger.

PEAKING CHATTER, then -- Tyler moves into position directly under the
light bulb.  His face is partially in shadow.

Everyone spreads out, forming a circle, the light bulb for a center. 
Tyler's will WIPES through the room and the CHATTER DIES.  A couple of
COUGHS, FEET SHUFFLING.  Then, SILENCE.

TYLER
The first rule of fight club is -- you don't talk about fight club. 
The second rule of fight club is -- you don't talk about fight club.

Jack glances over at a short guy, RICKY, with a BLACK EYE.

JACK (V.O.)
This kid, Ricky -- supply clerk -- he can't remember whether you
ordered pens with blue ink or black ink ...

TYLER
The third rule in fight club is -- when someone says "stop" or goes
limp, the fight is over.  The fourth rule is -- only two guys to a
fight.

PG 46

JACK (V.O.)
But Ricky was a god for ten minutes when he trounced an actuary twice
his size.

TYLER
Fifth rule -- one fight at a time.  Sixth rule -- no shirts or shoes. 
Seventh rule -- fights go on as long as they have to.  And the eighth
rule of fight club is -- if this is your first night, you *have* to
fight.

Tyler steps back, and a FAT MAN and a GOATEED MAN take off their shirts
and shoes and step into the center.  They circle each other, then begin
throwing punches.  SWEAT flies into the moist air.  SHOUTS become
DEAFENING.

JACK (V.O.)
Sometimes you could hear flat, hard packing sounds over all the yelling
as someone caught his breath and sprayed:

GOATEED MAN
Ssstop.

INT. OFFICE PARK RESTAURANT - DAY

Jack, eating lunch, is served a refill soda by the BROKEN-NOSED WAITER
with a GOATEE, the man from the above fight.

JACK (V.O.)
Even if I could tell someone they had a good fight, I wouldn't be
talking to the same man.  Who you were in fight club is not who you
were in the rest of your world.  You weren't alive anywhere like you
were alive at fight club.  But fight club only exists in the hours
between when fight club starts and when fight club ends.

INT. JACK'S OFFICE - DAY

Boss, passing by the doorway, looks in at Jack with irritated wonder. 
Jack, playing solitaire on his computer, daubs blood from his mouth
with a handkerchief.

BOSS
What are you getting yourself into every week?

PG 47

Jack flashes a smile at Boss.  Boss shakes his head, walks away.

JACK (V.O.)
After a night in fight club, everything else in your life gets the
volume turned down.  You can deal with anything.  All the people who
used to have power over you have less and less.

Reflexively, Jack's tongue plays with his teeth.

JACK (V.O.)
By this point, I could wiggle most of the teeth in my jaw.

INT. BUS - DAY

Jack stands, holding a hand grip.  An arrogant MAN in a three-piece
suit brushes past him, knockng his shoulder.

JACK (V.O.)
We all started to size people up.

Jack violently knocks the Man's shoulder in return.  The Man turns and
he and Jack face each other for a brief moment.  Jack's face is stone.

JACK (V.O.)
I'd look at some asshole and *know* I could beat him.

The arrogant Man continues down the aisle.  Jack notices a GUY with
SMASHED LIP.  The Guy grins, giving a slight nod.

INT. PARKING GARAGE - DAY (FLASHBACK)

Jack walks past the parking garage.  He sees a VALET who has facial
bruises.

JACK (V.O.)
We were all doing it.

The Valet and Jack share a quick smile.  A BMW pulls up and HONKS at
the Bruised Valet. The bruised Valet has no reaction as a FAT EXEC gets
out of his car and tosses the keys.  Jack watches the Bruised Valet
size up the Exec, then hop into the car and loudly PEEL OUT.

PG 48

JACK (V.O.)
I would see them all the time -- fight club members looking at other
guys, knowing they could kick their asses.

INT. TAVERN BASEMENT - NIGHT

Jack lands a couple of jabs to HIS OPPONENT'S stomach, then brings up a
left uppercut that smashes the Opponent's jaw.  Tiny spatters of BLOOD
adorn the walls, along with sweat.

JACK (V.O.)
Fight club was not about winning or losing.  It wasn't about words.

The Opponent recovers, throws a headlock on Jack.  Jack snakes his arm
into a counter headlock.  They, wrestling like wild animals.  The crowd
CHEERS maniacally.

JACK (V.O.)
The hysterical shouting was in tongues, like at a Pentecostal church.

The onlookers kneel to stay with the fight, cheering ever louder.  The
Opponent smashes Jack's head into the floor, over and over.

JACK
Stop.

Everyone moves in as the Opponent steps away.  They lift Jack to his
feet.  On the floor is a BLOOD MASK of Jack's face -- similar to his
TEAR MASK on BOB'S SHIRT, seen earlier.  Tyler pushes through the
crowd.

TYLER
Cool.

EXT. BAR - NIGHT

Everyone files out of the bar, sweating, bleeding, smiling.

JACK (V.O.)
Afterwards, we all felt saved.

PG 49

EXT. SIDEWALK - NIGHT

Jack and Tyler walk through the pools of light cast by streetlamps. 
They both drip blood and sport bruises.  They each carry a 4x4 piece of
WOOD.  As they pass parked cars, they SLAM the sticks against the front
bumpers, setting off the ALARMS and causing the AIR BAGS to INFLATE.

They come to a bus stop that has a large display ad for jeans.  It has
a photo of a shirtless man.

TYLER
Is that what a man looks like?

JACK
Isn't it?

Tyler smears blood on the ad.  They continue on their way.  Tyler comes
to a "ROAD WORK" sign.  Tyler kicks it into a deep HOLE.  He and Jack
tightrope-walk on wooden beams over darkness.

TYLER
Guys packing into the gyms, all trying to look like what Calvin Klein
says.  Fight club isn't about looking good.

As they step back onto solid pavement, Tyler kicks one of the beams,
causing it to come loose and fall.  The whole temporary work structure
falls into the hole.  Tyler and Jack continue walking.  IN the
background, a car SKIDS and FISHTAILS, avoiding the hole.

Sound of a SIREN getting closer.  Tyler hands Jack the 4x4 and runs,
laughing.  Jack stands there a moment, then throws the stick and runs
after Tyler.

JACK (V.O.)
A guy comes to fight club for the first time, and his ass is a wad of
cookie dough.  After a few weeks, he looks carved out of wood.  He
trusts himself to handle anything.

EXT. ANOTHER STREET - CONTINUOUS

Jack and Tyler, panting, sweat mixing with blood, slow down and resume
walking.  Tyler pulls his fingers, popping them -- his knuckles are
swollen.  He grins at the pain.

TYLER
Self-improvement is masturbaation.  Self-destruction is the answer.

PG 50

INT. PAPER ST. HOUSE - KITCHEN - LATE AFTERNOON

The PHONE RINGS.  Jack enters from the living room, buttoning his
shirt.  He answers.

JACK
Hello?

INTERCUT WITH

INT. MARLA'S ROOM - SAME

She lies on the bed, twisting the phone cord around her neck like a
noose.

MARLA
Where have you been the last few weeks?

JACK
Marla?

MARLA
I haven't seen you at any support groups.

JACK
That's the idea -- we split them.

MARLA 
You haven't been going to yours.

JACK
I found a new one.

MARLA
Really?  Can I go to it?

JACK
It's for men.

MARLA
Like testicular cancer?

JACK
Like that.  Look, this is a bad time.

MARLA
I started going to debtor's anonymous.  You want to see *really* fucked
up people?

JACK
Look, I'm going out ...

PG 51

MARLA
I'm going out of my mind.  I got a stomach full of Xanax.  I took what
was left of the bottle.  Might've been too much ... probably was.

Jack turns TO CAMERA.

JACK (V.O.)
Picture yourself watching Marla throw herself around her crummy
apartment, saying, "I'm dying.  Dying.  Dying.  It could go on for
hours.

JACK
You probably want to die in peace.  I'll let you go.

MARLA
Stay on the line.  I want you to hear me describe death.

Jack puts the handset on top of the phone, still off the hook, and
walks out of the kitchen.

MARLA'S VOICE
I want to see if my spirit can use the telephone.

INT. BEDROOM - LATE NIGHT

GRUNTS of PLEASURE and EXERTION.  In dim light, we get glimpses of
TORSOS, ASSES, LEGS, ARMS, BREASTS, and BLACK FEMALE HAIR -- all
DRENECHED in SWEAT.  Sheets RIP.  CA-CHUNK! CA-CHUNK! Bodies hit the
FLOOR and roll.  More insane GRUNTING.  And LAUGHING -- CACKLING.  A
flash of MARLA'S FACE.  Then, groans of ecstasy approaching climax. 
CUT TO:

INT. JACK'S BEDROOM - SUNRISE

Jack sits up in bed, looks around the room.

INT. 2ND FLOOR LANDING

Jack steps out of his room, looks down to the next door -- the door is
closed.

JACK (V.O.)
Tyler's door was closed.  I'd been living here a month, and Tyler's
door never closed.

PG 52

INT. BATHROOM - SAME

Jack stares into the toilet.  CLOSE UP - SIX USED CONDOMS IN TOILET.

INT. KITCHEN - MORNING

Jack sits at the table, sipping coffee, reading Reader's Digest.  He
takes in a long yawn, rubs his eyes.  He hears FOOTSTEPS approaching.

JACK
You're not going to believe the dream I had.

Marla walks in, straightening her dress.  She looks like she's been
raped by a hurricane.  Some of her hair is matted against her head,
some of it is sticking out wildly.  Jack gapes at her in shock.  She
cracks a coy smile and runs a finger across the back of his neck.

MARLA
I can hardly believe *anything* about last night.

She pours herself a cup of coffee.  She takes a big gulp, GARGLES and
SPITS it out into the sink.  She gives Jack a lascivious smile.  Then,
she sips from the cup.  She strokes his hair.  He pulls back from her.

JACK
What the fuck are you doing here?!

Marla looks at him a beat, then throws the cup into the sink and it
SHATTERS.

MARLA
Fuck you.

She kicks open the door to the backyard and walks out.  Jack watches
her stomp across the lawn to the sidewalk and down the street.

Jack turns and -- Tyler is at his shoulder, staring after Marla.  He's
in his usual sweatpants.  He grins at Jack, then moves away, pours
himself coffee.  Jack, smoldering, slumps at the table and picks up
Reader's Digest.  Tyler puts his foot on a countertop and begins to do
stretching exercises.

TYLER
That crazy bitch almost fucked me in half.   Get this -- I come home
and the phone is off the hook ...

PG 53

MOVE IN ON JACK'S FACE as he pretends to read, but glances up at Tyler.
 TYLER'S VOICE FADES as:

JACK (V.O.)
I already knew the story before he told it to me.

INT. KITCHEN - LATE AFTERNOON (FLASHBACK)

Tyler enters through the back door and moves to the phone.

MARLA'S VOICE (from handset)
I'll tell you when I'm floating out of my body.

Gently, Tyler lifts the handset and listens, smiling.

JACK (V.O.)
I don't know why, but Tyler actually thought it was a *bad* thing that
Marla was about to die.

INT. 8TH FLOOR LANDING - LATE AFTERNOON (FLASHBACK)

Tyler reaches the top of the stairs and heads for Marla's room.  Before
he can knock, Marla's hand shoots out and grabs Tyler's arm.

INT. MARLA'S ROOM - CONTINUOUS (FLASHBACK)

Marla pulls Tyler inside and shuts the door.  Her drugged eyes look him
over.

MARLA
You got here fast.

She staggers and sits on the bed.  She slides off, along with the
blanket and sheets, to the floor.

MARLA
The mattresses here are all sealed in slippery plastic.

She tries to focus her eye on Tyler.

MARLA
Did I call you?

SIRENS and vehicles SCREECHING to a halt outside.  Doors opening and
SLAMMING; running FOOTFALL.  Marla scowls and RAMS Tyler with her knee,
knocking him off her.

PG54

MARLA
You called the cops?!  Shit!

She gets to her feet, grabs Tyler, hauls him to his feet and pulls him
out the door.

INT. HALLWAY (FLASHBACK)

Marla LOCKS her door, then shoves Tyler toward the staircase.  She and
Tyler suddenly flatten agains the wall as COPS and PARAMEDICS charge by
with oxygen.

COP
Where's 8-G?

MARLA
End of the hall.

The rescuers keep running.  Marla and Tyler start down the steps. 
Marla lingers a beat, hearing the cops bang on the door.  She calls out
to them:

MARLA
The girl who lives there used to be a charming, lovely girl.  But she
has no faith in herself.

Tyler yanks on Marla's arm.  They continue down the steps, with Marla's
speech getting louder.

MARLA
And she's worried that, as she grows older, she'll have less options. 
She's turned into a monster!  She's infectious human waste!  Good luck
trying to save her!

INT. KITCHEN - NIGHT (FLASHBACK)

Tyler makes coffee.  Marla slouches against the refrigerator.

MARLA
If I fall asleep, I die.  You have to keep me up all night.

Tyler smiles.

JACK (V.O.)
He was able to handle it.

PG 55

INT. TYLER'S ROOM - DAWN (FLASHBACK)

Marla and Tyler, in a wrecked bed.  Tyler's eyes are closed.  Marla
kisses his ear.

MARLA
According to ancient Chinese custom, you're responsible for me forever,
because you saved my life.

INT. KITCHEN - MORNING - RESUMING

Tyler gulps some coffee, shaking his head.

TYLER
... And she's spouting this crap she got from watching too much
television.

JACK (V.O.)
If only I hadn't gone to a movie.  If only I went to her stupid room to
watch her die.

Tyler sits opposite him, studies his face.

TYLER
You aren't doing her, are you?

JACK (V.O.)
I Am Joe's Raging Bile Duct.

JACK
No.

TYLER
I didn't think so.

JACK
You didn't think so?

TYLER
She's not your type.

JACK
How would you know what my type is?

TYLER
She's just a wild, twisted bitch.

JACK
Oh, and my pace is more librarians and den mothers.

TYLER
Kinky.

PG56

JACK (V.O.)
How could someone like Tyler get involved with someone like Marla
Singer?  It was impossible.

JACK 
Marla doesn't need a lover.  She needs a case worker.

TYLER
This is sport-fucking.  She's a hosebag.

JACK (V.O.)
She invaded my support groups, now she's invaded my home.  My
friendship.  Like a cancer.

TYLER
You're okay, aren't you?

JACK (V.O.)
I Am Joe's Clenching Bowels.

JACK
Sure.

JACK (V.O.)
Put a gun to my head and paint the wall with my brains.

JACK
It's fine, great.

TYLER
Now, listen.  You gotta understand something about me.  I got a little
rule.  Don't ever talk to her about me.  I can't stand that kind of
shit.

Tyler fixes Jack with a friendly, but firm stare.

TYLER
If you ever mention me to her -- or anyone else -- I'll find out about
it.  And you'll never see me again.

JACK 
Okay.

PG 57

TYLER
You promise?

JACK 
I promise.

Tyler abruptly gets up and leaves the kitchen.  Jack watches him go,
smoldering.

INT. LIVING ROOM - NIGHT

Jack sits watching television at HIGH VOLUME.  Sounds of ROUGH SEX from
upstairs.

CUT TO:

INT. JACK'S BEDROOM - NIGHT

Jack lies calmly, in a Zen state, on his bed, staring at the ceilng. 
Sounds of THUMPS and CRASHES from beyond the wall, along with Tyler's
and Marla's VOICES, SNARLING:

MARLA'S VOICE
You slimy discharge!

JACK (V.O.)
I could've moved to another room, one on the third floor -- so I
wouldn't have heard them.  But I didn't.

INT. BATHROOM - NIGHT

Jack brushes his teeth.

JACK (V.O.)
I wrote little haiku things:
"Worker bees can leave
Even drones can fly away
The queen is their slave"
I became the calm little center of the world.  I was the Zen master.

MOVE IN ON -- KEYHOLE - Jack's EYE

MARLA (gasping in passion)
I love you.  I want to have your abortion.

PG 58

INT. BASEMENT - NIGHT

Sound of RAIN pelting the house.  Jack flips the fuses off, walks up
the stairs.

JACK (V.O.)
"A tiger can smile
A snake will say it loves you
Lies make us evil"

INT. 2ND FLOOR LANDING - SAME

Jack walks up the steps.  He hears Marla SCREAM in orgasm.  He reaches
the landing.  Tyler's door is slightly ajar.  Jack can't help stopping.

JACK'S POV - TYLER'S ROOM

Marla's legs are sprawled on the bed.  Her head is down over the far
side, out of view.  The door PUSHES OPEN WIDER -- Tyler, naked, stands
CLOSE TO CAMERA.

TYLER
What are you doing?

WIDE ON LANDING

Jack steps back.

JACK
I ... uh ... just going to bed.

Tyler grins and nods toward bed.

TYLER
You want to finish her off?

JACK
Uh ... nah ...

Jack continues toward his room.

INT. JACK'S OFFICE - DAY

Jack's clothes are PERMANENTLY STAINED with BLOOD.  He sits in his Zen
pose, typing.  We see his HAIKUS on the screen.

JACK (V.O.)
I faxed them around to everyone.

He hits "SEND".  Boss enters, reacts with exasperated irritaiton at the
sight.

PG 59

BOSS
Is that your blood?

JACK
*Some* of it, yeah.

Boss stares at Jack like he's from Mars.

BOSS
Take the rest of the day off.  Come back tomorrow with clean clothes. 
And get yourself together.

INT. HALLWAY - SAME

Jack, looking like a war casualty, walks past COWORKERS who coldly
stare at him.  His face is totally passive.

JACK (V.O.)
I got right in everyone's hostile little face.  Yes, these are bruises
from fighting.  See?  It's nothing to me?  See how cool I am about it? 
That's right, I'm enlightened!

EXT. PAPER STREET - SUNSET

Jack walks toward the house.

JACK (V.O.)
You give up the condo life, give up all your worldly possessions and go
live in a dilapidated house in the toxic waste part of town.

INT. TYLER'S KITCHEN - SUNSET

Jack walks inside.  Sound of VIOLENT SEX from upstairs -- THUDS and
WHAMS.  Pieces of PLASTER fall from the ceiling in tufts of dust.

JACK (V.O.)
... And you come home to *this*.

TYLER'S VOICE
Take that, butt wipe!!

Jack rolls his eyes, takes off his pants.  He runs water in the sink. 
He takes a tiny bit of soap and begins to scrub the blood stains. 
PHONE RINGS.  He answers.

JACK
Hello?  Speaking.

PG 60

INTERCUT WITH

INT. POLICE STATION - OFFICE

DETECTIVE STERN leans forward in his chair, consulting a file.

DETECTIVE STERN
This is Detective Stern with the arson unit.  We have some new
information about your condo.  The deadbolt on your front door was
shattered.  Someone sprayed freon into the lock to freeze it.  Then,
they tapped it with a cold chisel to shatter the cylinder.

JACK (V.O.)
I Am Joe's Cold Sweat.

And, in fact, cold sweat beads up on Jack's forehead.  He scrubs his
pants obsessively.

DETECTIVE STERN
The dynamite had a residue of ammonium oxalate and potassium
perchloride -- this means we can assume it was homemade.

JACK
This is ... really a shock to me, Sir.

DETECTIVE STERN
Whoever set the dynamite could've turned on the gas and blown out the
pilot lights on the stove days before the explosion took place.  The
gas was just the trigger.

JACK
Who do you think did it?

DETECTIVE STERN
I'm asking the questions, son.

JACK
I loved my life.  I loved that condo.  I loved every stick of
furniture.  That was my whole life.  Everything -- the lamps, the
chairs, the rugs -- *were* me.  The dishes were me.  The plants were
me.  The television was me.

PG 61

JACK (V.O.)
I'd like to thank the academy ...

DETECTIVE STERN
Do you know anyone who'd have the expertise and the motive to do
something like this?

Jack's eyes move upward, then back down.

JACK
Uh ... no.

DETECTIVE STERN
Well, think about it.  If any ideas come to you, give me a call.  And,
in the meantime, don't leave town.

END INTERCUT

Jack hangs up the phone, turns to see Tyler standing right next to him.
 Tyler puts a hand on Jack's shoulder, squeezes it affectionately. 
Jack turns away and continues to scrub -- rebuffing Tyler.  Tyler
smiles compassionately at him.

Marla's FOOTSTEPS can be heard coming down the stairs.  JACK'S POV --
as he really grinds the soap against the pants, splashes water all over
the place.

JACK'S POV PIVOTS, WIDEN ON ROOM.  Marla enters.  Tyler is GONE.  Jack
looks around to the open back door, then back at Marla.  She lights a
cigarette.

JACK (V.O.)
Except for their humping, Tyler and Marla were never in the same room. 
The same disappearing act my parents pulled for years -- one came in,
and the other was gone.

Marla moves very close to Jack and props a leg up on a stack of
magazines near him.  She's not wearing underwear.  Jack becomes very
aware of his having no pants on, so he pushes up against the counter. 
Marla lasciviously pulls the hemline further up her leg.

MARLA
I got this dress at a thrift store for one dollar.

JACK
It was worth every penny.

PG 62

MARLA
It's a bridesmaid's dress.  Someone loved it intensely for one day,
then tossed it.  Like a Christmas tree -- so special, then, bam, it's
on the side of the road with tinsel still clinging to it.

She leans in very close to his ear and whispers hoarsely:

MARLA
You can borrow it sometime.

JACK
That's hysterical.

Marla blows smoke into Jack's face.  He grabs her cigarette, throws it
into the water in the sink.  She smiles saucily and LEAVES the room. 
Sound of her FOOTSTEPS going upstairs.

TYLER (O.S.)
Get rid of her.

Jack turns and sees Tyler in the back doorway.

JACK
*You* get rid of her.

TYLER
And don't mention my name.  You promised.

JACK
Yes, yes, I promise.

TYLER
Promise?

JACK
I said I promise!

TYLER
That was three times you promised.

Marla's FOOTSTEPS can be heard coming down the staircase.

TYLER
Tell her to go.

Jack looks toward the archway, then back at -- ?  Tyler is GONE.  Marla
glides into the kitchen with a PACK of cigarettes.  She daintily takes
one out and lights it.

PG 63

JACK (V.O.)
I'm six years old again, passing messages between my parents.

JACK
Uh ... I think you should go now.

Marla begins to do a slow, exotic dance around the kitchen, sometimes
moving very close to Jack, sometimes moving away.  She lifts her dress
dangerously high -- does she expose herself? -- hard to tell.  She
dances very close to Jack's body, almost touching it.

JACK
What are you trying to do?!

Marla stops dancing, and BURSTS into loud LAUGHTER.

MARLA
You're such a nutcase, I can't even begin to keep up.

She touches Jack's hair.  He slaps her hand away.

JACK
Just get out of here.

Marla's face turns sour.  As she stomps out the back door --

MARLA
I'm already so fucking gone that all you see is an after-image.

Jack watches her through the kitchen window.

TYLER (O.S.)
Good job.

As Jack turns, we WIDEN to include Tyler, standing right behind Jack,
beaming.  Through the window, in the background, Marla can be seen
quickly moving away on the sidewalk.  Tyler puts his hand on Jack's
shoulder.

TYLER
Let's get out of this place for awhile, take a walk.

EXT. STREET - NIGHT

Tyler moves forward at a brisk pace.  Jack keeps up with him.  Tyler
cuts across a paved road and into a WOODED AREA.  Jack follows.

PG 64

EXT. ALL-NIGHT CONVENIENCE STORE - MOMENTS LATER

Tyler, with Jack following, emerges from the trees and heads into the
parking lot.  A Clerk ambles toward his car, taking off his uniform bow
tie.  Tyler suddenly pulls a HANDGUN out of his belt and rams it
against the Clerk's head.

EXT. WOODED AREA - CONTINUOUS

Tyler marches the Clerk, the gun aimed at his head.  Jack follows.

JACK
What are you doing?!

TYLER
Shut up.

JACK
Are you out of your fucking mind?!

TYLER
Shut up.

Tyler stops the Clerk and pushes him down to a kneeling position.

TYLER
Give me your wallet.

The Clerk fumbles his wallet out of his pocket and Tyler snatches it. 
Tyler pulls out the driver's license. 

TYLER
Raymond K. Hessel.  1320 SE Benning, apartment A.  A small, cramped
basement apartment.

RAYMOND
How'd you know?

TYLER
They give basement apartments letters instead of numbers.  Raymond,
you're going to die.

RAYMOND
Please, God, no.

JACK
What are you doing?!

PG 65

TYLER (to Jack)
SHUT UP!  You have no idea of what it is to hit bottom.  I've been
trying to get you there -- I blew up your condo.

JACK
... The ... cops are onto you.

TYLER
No, they think *you* did it.

Tyler continues, to Raymond:

TYLER
Your mom and dad will have to call old doctor so-and-so to get your
dental records, because there won't be much of your face left.

Raymond begins to weep, his shoulders heaving.  Jack starts to gasp for
air.  Growing even paler, he slumps back against a tree.  His mouth
becomes dry.

TYLER
Is this a picture of Mom and Dad?

RAYMOND
Yesss ...

JACK
Look, if this is all about me ...

TYLER
You?  Nothing is about you.

JACK
I'm doing okay, aren't I?

TYLER
You don't have your cute, little condo or your fey furniture, you're
living in squalor ...

Tyler continues, to Raymond:

TYLER
An expired community college student ID card.  What did you used to
study, Raymond K. Hessel?

RAYMOND
S-S-Stuff.

PG 66

TYLER
"Stuff".  Were the mid-terms hard?

Tyler shoves the gun against Raymond's temple.

TYLER
I asked you what you studied.

RAYMOND
Biology, mostly.

TYLER
Why?

RAYMOND
I don't know.

TYLER
What did you want to be Raymond K. Hessel?

A long beat while Raymond weeps and says nothing.  Tyler COCKS the gun.
 Jack JERKS back, wincing, sweating.

JACK
... Tyler?

TYLER
I'm busy.

Tyler continues, to Raymond:

TYLER
The question, Raymond, was "what did you want to be"?

Tyler begins to squeeze the trigger.

JACK (croaking with dry mouth)
Answer him!

RAYMOND
A VETERINARIAN!

TYLER
Animals.

RAYMOND
Yeah ... animals and s-s-s --

TYLER
-- *Stuff*.  That means you have to get more schooling.

PG 67

RAYMOND
Too much school.

TYLER
Would you rather be dead?

Tyler shoves Raymond's wallet back into his pocket.

TYLER
I'm keeping your license.  I know where you live.  I'm going to check
on you.  If you aren't back in school on your way to being a
veterinarian, you will be dead.  Now, get the hell out of here.

Raymond staggers into the darkness.  Tyler watches.  Jack, still
clinging to a branch with a deathgrip, looks at Tyler.  Tyler slowly
turns to face Jack.

TYLER
Raymond K. Hessel, tomorrow will be the most beautiful day of your
life.  Your breakfast is going to taste better than any meal you've
ever eaten.

Jack's eyes light up.  He looks at the fleeing Raymond, then back at
Tyler.  He sighs, then shakes his head, then cracks his weird, little
crooked smile.  His eyes glow.  He looks with almost religious
reverence at Tyler.

Tyler turns and smiles at Jack.

TYLER
To make soap, first you have to render fat.

CLOSE UP - SIGN:  "DANGER - BIOHAZARD"

PULL BACK TO WIDE ON

EXT. FENCED-IN BIOHAZARD WASTE DUMP SITE - NIGHT

Tyler is on the ground, inside the fence.  Jack's at the top of the
fence, trying to get through the BARBED WIRE.  He does so, but wobbles
and gets his shirt snagged.  Tyler tries to help him.  Jack falls,
ripping his shirt.  Tyler breaks the fall, gets Jack to his feet.

FOOTSTEPS.  FLASHLIGHT BEAM.  Tyler pulls Jack down behind a DUMPSTER
-- one of DOZENS in the site.  A silhouette of a SECURITY GUARD moves
along the perimeter, waving the flashlight around.  He finally walks
back toward the adjacent building, goes inside.

PG 68

MOVE BACK to Tyler and Jack, who emerge from hiding.  Tyler eagerly
grabs the lid of the closest dumpster.  Jack gapes at the "biohazard"
sign.

TYLER
The best fat for making soap -- because the salt balance is just right
-- comes from human bodies.

Tyler lifts the lid -- it CREAKS.  Jack breathes heavily, afraid to
look.  Tyler pulls out an industrial-sized, think plastic bag full of
PINK GOO.  Jack reacts to the smell, turning away.  His eyes focus on
the side of the adjacent building and its SIGN:  "BODY SCULPTING
CLINIC".

TYLER
>From the asses and thighs of rich women, paydirt.

INT. KITCHEN - NIGHT

Jack watches at Tyler stirs a boiling pot.

TYLER
As the fat renders, the tallow floats to the surface of the water.

EXT. WASTE DUMP SITE - NIGHT (RESUMING)

Tyler and Jack climb back over the fence, each carrying several bags of
fat.  One of Jack's bags gets caught on the barbed wire and rips,
spilling the goo all down the fence.  Jack's pants and shoes get
covered; he slips and slides.  Tyler starts laughing.  Jack starts
laughing.

INT. KITCHEN - NIGHT (RESUMING)

Tyler shows Jack two pots which have a skinned-over layer.

TYLER
When the tallow separates, there will be a clear layer on top.  It's
glycerin.  We can mix it back in when we make the soap.

EXT. WASTE DUMP SITE - NIGHT (RESUMING)

Tyler helps Jack over the fence.  They both fall to the ground on the
other side, laughing.  They try to get up and they both slip in fat,
falling on their asses.  They laugh louder.  FOOTSTEPS; FLASHLIGHT.

PG 69

Still hysterically laughing, they both get up, slide and fall down
again, get up yet again and stagger away, disappearing around a corner.

INT. TAXICAB - MOMENTS LATER

Jack and Tyler, slimed with fat, hold their bags, giggling.  The CAB
DRIVER gives them a deadpan look.

END OVERLAPPING INTERCUT.  CUT TO:

INT. KITCHEN - LATE NIGHT

Tyler and Jack have fat stains and rips on their clothes from the waste
dump.  The pots boil.  Tyler stirs.  He sticks a spoon into a pot and
lifts up a scoop of the glycerin layer.  Then, he grabs a can, opens,
it.

TYLER
Lye -- the crucial ingredient for making soap.  A paste of lye and
water can burn through an aluminum pan.  A solution of lye and water
will dissolve a wooden spoon.  Combined with water, lye heats to over
two hundred degrees.

Tyler licks his lips until they're gleaming wet.  He takes Jack's hand
and KISSES the back of it.  The saliva shines in the shape of the kiss.
 Tyler poises the can of lye over Jack's hand.

TYLER
This is a chemical burn, and it will hurt more than you've ever been
burned.

Tyler pours a bit of the flaked lye onto Jack's hand.  Jack's whole
body JERKS.  Tyler holds tight to Jack's hand.  Tears well in Jack's
eyes; his face tightens.

TYLER
Look at your hand.

Jack looks -- the burn is swollen glossy in the shape of Tyler's kiss. 
Jack's face spasms, but he forces himself to endure it.

JACK (V.O.)
Tyler's kiss was a bonfire or a branding iron on my hand at the end of
a long, long road I pictured miles away from me.

PG 70

Jack takes his gaze off his hand and his eyes become glazed and
detached.

TYLER
Come back to the pain.

JACK (V.O.)
Guided meditation worked for cancer it could work for this.

TYLER
Don't shut this out.

JACK (V.O.)
I didn't think of the words "pain" or "searing flesh".  I was going to
my cave to find my power animal.

Quick CUT TO:

INT. CAVE

Marla, looking beautiful in a stunning black dress.

As soon as Tyler speaks, we CUT BACK TO:

INT. KITCHEN - NIGHT

Tyler squeezing Jack's hand.  Jack's eyes re-focus on Tyler.

TYLER
This is the greatest moment of your life and you're off somewhere,
missing it.  Listen.  Your father was your model for God.  And if your
father bails out, what does that tell you about God?

Jack's face spasms in pain.  He keeps his attention on Tyler.

TYLER
You have to consider the possibility that God doesn't like you.  He
hates you.  This is not the worst thing that can happen.  His hate is
better that His indifference.

Jack becomes dazed again.  CUT TO:

INT. CAVE

Marla drops to the ground and pulls Jack on top of her.  Jack moves to
kiss her.  CUT TO:

PG 71

INT. KITCHEN - NIGHT

Tyler tugs at Jack's arm.

TYLER
We are God's middle children, with no special place in history and no
special attention.  Unless we get God's attention, we have no hope of
damnation or redemption.

Jack looks at Tyler and they lock eyes in a stare.

TYLER
The lower you fall, the higher you fly.  The farther you run, the more
God wants you back.

Jack does his best to stifle his spasms and quivers of pain.  Tears
drip from his eyes.

TYLER
Someday, you will die.  And until you know that, you're useless to me.

Tyler's eyes fill with tears and he smiles.  Suddenly, Jack starts
breathing heavily and he shakes his hand.

JACK
Fuck, man.  This HURTS.

Tyler laughs; Jack, bearing the pain, cracks a weird little crooked
smiles, his eyes wide.

INT. KITCHEN - SUNRISE

Tyler watches as Jack cuts several perfectly shaped bars of soap. 
Tyler finishes wrapping one.  The wrapper says: "The Paper Street Soap
Company" in quaint writing.

INT. BARNEY'S - DAY

Jack and Tyler, wearing trenchcoats and looking like death-warmed-over,
wait by a counter and trendily-dressed and finely-coiffed SALESPEOPLE
zip around.  Tyler is the picture of cool.  Jack looks around as if
expecting to get arrested.  He looks at his BANDAGED HAND, shakes it.

A BUYER, a woman, comes to the counter, smiles at Tyler; he smiles
back.  MOS while Jack's VOICE is OVER the following:  the Buyer looks
over a sample bar of soap.  She nods, smiles and begins to fill out
forms.

PG 72

JACK (V.O.)
Tyler sold it to the stores at twenty bucks a bar.  God knows what they
charged.  We were selling rich women their own fat back to them.

EXT. STREET - NIGHT

Jack and Tyler march down the sidewalk, full of purpose, like
gunfighters heading for a show-down.

TYLER
Look at the guys in fight club.  The strongest and smartest men who
have ever lived -- and they're pumping gas and waiting tables; or
they're slaves with white collars.  Advertising has them chasing cars
and clothes.  A whole generation working in jobs they hate, just so
they can buy shit they don't really need.

INT. HIGH SCHOOL HALLWAY - NIGHT

MEN are entering the gymnasium for the testicular cancer support group
"Remaining Men Together".  Bob starts to file in with the rest, and
suddenly, Jack darts forth from the shadows and blocks his way.

BOB
Hi.

JACK
Hi, Bob.

Bob tries to go through the door, but Jack blocks him.

JACK
Are you really a man?

BOB
Yes ... we all are.

JACK
I'm not so sure.

Jack forcefully pushes Bob.  Caught off-guard, he backs into a locker
with a bang.  Jack slaps Bob's face.

JACK
Come on, you big moose.  Let's see if you are.

PG 73

Jack punches Bob in the stomach.  Bob puts up his hands to block.  Jack
throws more punches.  Finally, Bob punches Jack in the face, knocking
him staggering.  Jack comes back and they pummel each other.  Bob's
face gets redder with anger.

Then, Jack steps back, holding out his hands to signal "stop".

JACK
Let's take this somewhere else.

INT. BASEMENT - ELECTRONICS WAREHOUSE - NIGHT

The crowd screams insanely as Bob and Jack go at it in the circle of
light.  Bob's eyes are wild with glee.

EXT. BASEMENT DOOR - ELECTRONICS WAREHOUSE - LATER

Everyone quietly sneaks out of the new location -- we've seen none of
these guys before -- this is a new chapter.  Jack and Bob stagger out
last.  They are both dripping blood and covered with bruises -- Jack
being in worse shape -- and they both grin with religious serenity. 
Bob hugs Jack.

BOB
Thank you.  Thank you.

Bob relaxes the hug and Jack drops to the ground like a sack, enervated
from the beating he took.

JACK
You're welcome.

JACK (V.O.)
Fight club -- this was mine and Tyler's gift -- our gift to the world.

EXT. STREET - DAY

Ricky grapples with a YUPPIE.  They fall to the sidewalk, pounding each
other.

YUPPIE
WHO ARE YOU?!  WHY DID YOU ATTACK ME?!

The Yuppie maneuvers Ricky toward a metal fence and insanely tries to
impale him on a spike.  Tyler and Jack shoot INTO VIEW and grab the
YUPPIE, laughing.

YUPPIE
WHO ARE *YOU*!!

PG 74

INT. TRUCK GARAGE - NIGHT

Ricky and the Yuppie fight each other while the crowd -- still even
more new guys -- cheers.

JACK (V.O.)
We started a fight club for every night of the week.

CLOSE UP - BUMPERSTICKER

Which reads: "DRUNK DRIVERS AGAINST MOTHERS".

A HAND presses it down in all corners.  PULL BACK TO REVEAL - the
bumper, THEN the whole car -- a luxury sedan.  THEN - the entire
PARKING STRUCTURE wherein ALL the bumpers have the sticker.

JACK (V.O.)
We started pulling pranks.

EXT. STREET - LATE NIGHT

Jack, Tyler and Ricky quickly paste up a basic,
black-on-white-lettering BILLBOARD.  It says: "DID YOU KNOW ... ?  YOU
CAN USE YOUR OLD MOTOR OIL TO FERTILIZE YOUR LAWN! -- ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION AGENCY".

TYLER
We're the middle children of history, with no special purpose or place.
 We don't have a great war in our generation, or a great depression. 
The great depression is our lives.  The great war is a spiritual war.

EXT. LARGE PARKING LOT - DAY

Jack and Bob, armed with a toolbox, change the "Enter" and "Exit" signs
around.  They walk away.  In the background, a car drives into the
"entrance" and the front tires EXPLODE from the BLADES in the ground.

PG 75

EXT. SIDEWALK - NIGHT

Jack walks toward an intersection, beyond which is a large CITY PARK. 
A group of people are LEAVING A PUBLIC BUILDING in front of him.  Marla
is among them -- it's a support group adjourning for the night.  Jack
catches Marla's eye.  He simply smiles and waves.  Marla stares at him,
deadpan.  She turns and walks away, JUST AS ...

Tyler STEPS INTO FRAME, looking straight ahead at the park.  He signals
Jack and they move forward.  From out of nowhere, Bob joins them.

EXT. PARK - OUTDOOR BEER FESTIVAL - NIGHT

A bad BAND plays German music.  BANNERS advertising American beer are
everywhere.  People wear shirts and hats with beer ads.  Jack, Bob and
Tyler sneak up to the side of a portable TOILET.  They shove it until
it falls against the next toilet.  An ENTIRE ROW of portable toilets
falls like dominoes.  They dart behind a row of trees, then casually
walk away.

JACK (V.O.)
We were raised by television to believe that someday we'll all be
millionaires and movie stars and rock stars -- but we won't.  And we're
learning that fact.

TYLER
And we're very, *very* pissed-off.

INT. AIRPLANE CABIN - ON GROUND - DAY

Two AIRPLANE MAINTENANCE MEN -- with bruised faces -- rip open a box
from a PRINT SHOP.  They dig up handfuls of AIRLINE SAFETY INSTRUCTION
CARDS and begin to inset them into each seat back pouch.  We MOVE IN
and SEE a card -- it shows passengers SCREAMING and FLAILING ABOUT IN
TERROR.

INT. PAPER ST. HOUSE - KITCHEN - MORNING

Jack, dressed for work, receives a sheet of paper from Tyler.

TYLER
Make two dozen copies.  We're going to have --

PG 76

INT. PHOTOCOPY ROOM - DAY

Jack stands over a copy machine, getting hit by the flashes of light.

JACK (V.O.)
-- more than one fight club on every night of the week.

Jack looks around.  Other faces illuminated in FLASHES.  HALF of them
are bruised.  He smiles, his eyelids getting heavy and his head
nodding.

INT. JACK'S OFFICE - LATER

Jack sits in his cubicle, playing a game on his computer.  Boss enters.

JACK (V.O.)
He was wearing a yellow tie.  It must be Thursday.  I didn't even wear
a tie to work anymore.

Boss slaps a piece of paper down on Jack's desk.

BOSS
"The first rule of fight club is you don't talk about fight club".

Jack stares at him stoically.

JACK (V.O.)
I was still half-asleep all the time.  I left the original in the copy
machine.

BOSS
Is this yours?  "The second rule of fight club is you don't talk about
fight club".  Is it yours or not?  You don't get paid to abuse the copy
machine.

JACK
"Abuse" the copy machine.  What an image.

BOSS
Let's play pretend.  You're me.  You find *this*.  What would you do? 
Hmm?  Make a managerial decision.  What would you do?

PG 77

Jack slowly rises, walks softly to his office door, shuts it and faces
the boss.

JACK
I'd be very careful who I talked to about this.  It sounds like someone
dangerous wrote this, and this buttoned-down psychotic could probably
snap at any moment and stalk from office to office with an Armalite
AR-180 Carbine gas-operated semiautomatic.  He's probably at home every
night with a little rattail file, filing a cross into the tip of every
one of his bullets.  This way, when he pumps a round into ... *someone*
... it will split along the filed grooves and spread open the way a dum
dum flowers inside you to blow a load of guts out through *someone's*
spine.  This is probably somebody you've know for years.

Boss stares at him with a tinge of outrage, a tinge of fear.

JACK (V.O.)
Tyler's words.  Me clowning around.  And I used to be such a nice
person.

Jack's phone RINGS.  Jack answers.

JACK
Compliance and Liability.

MARLA'S VOICE
My tit's going to rot off.

JACK (to Boss; big smile)
Could you excuse me?  I need to take this call.

Boss goes to the office door opens it, stares at Jack a beat, then
leaves.

JACK (into phone)
What are you talking about?

PG 78

INTERCUT WITH

CLOSE-UP OF MARLA

In dim light, her face very pretty with make-up.

MARLA
I need you to check and see if there's a lump on my breast.  I can't
afford to blow the cash on a doctor just to find out.

JACK
I don't know ...

MARLA
You're the only one I can turn to.

JACK (V.O.)
She didn't call Tyler.  I'm neutral in her book.

MARLA
Meet me at work.

EXT. MORTUARY - LATE AFTERNOON

Jack goes through the front door.

INT. MORTUARY - SAME

Jack walks into the dim, dramatically-lit foyer.  He sees Marla at a
desk.  She does not see him.  She's wearing a black formal dress --
like a gorgeous angel of death.  A VERY FAT MALE CUSTOMER holds an URN
the size of an egg cup.  Marla studies the urn and the Customer's body
with a dreary expression.

MARLA
Sir, you couldn't get the ashes of your *neck* in here.

The Customer turns and stomps out the door.  Jack steps forward to the
desk.

JACK
Employee of the month?

Marla looks up at him and smiles.

PG 79

EXT. MARLA'S HOTEL - SUNSET

Jack watches as Marla takes two boxes from a van with sign "MEALS ON
WHEELS".

INT. MARLA'S ROOM - MOMENTS LATER

Marla leads Jack inside.

JACK
You know, this is a sweet side of you.

MARLA
Think so?

JACK
Picking these up for ... 
(reads off boxes:)
"Mrs. Haniver" and ... "Mrs. Raines".  Where are they?  Top floor?

MARLA
They're dead.  I'm alive and I'm in poverty.  You want any of this?

JACK
No, thanks.

MARLA
Good.

He stares at her while she wolfs down food.  Marla takes a napkin and
wipes her mouth.

MARLA
This napkin is "one-hundred percent recycled".  So is my toilet paper. 
Can you imagine.  The worst job in the world -- recycling toilet paper.

INT. MARLA'S ROOM - NIGHT

Marla stands in front of a mirror with her shirt open.  Jack stands
behind her with his hand on the bottom side of her breast.  Her hand
guides his.

JACK
Where?  Here?

MARLA
Here.

PG 80

JACK
There?

MARLA
Here.

JACK
Here.

MARLA
Feel anything?

JACK
No.

Jack's head is behind Marla's.  His eyes close.  Both of them speak
more slowly, softer.

MARLA
Make sure.

JACK
Okay.  Okay, I'm sure.

MARLA
You feel nothing?

JACK
Nothing.

He almost kisses her neck.  Marla turns around, faces him and begins to
slowly button up her shirt.

MARLA
Whew.  That's a relief.  Thanks.

JACK
No problem.

MARLA
I wish I could return the favor.

Jack touches his breasts, shakes his head.

JACK
I think everything's okay here.

MARLA
I could check your prostate.

JACK
Uh ... nah.

MARLA
Well, thanks.

PG 81

Marla kisses him -- and lingers for a bit longer than just friendly. 
Jack pulls away.

JACK
Are we done?

JACK
I gotta go.

Marla's voice turns acid:

MARLA
Yeah, we're done.  Get the fuck outta here.

Jack goes to her door, opens it, looks back at her.

JACK
I'm sorry.

MARLA
GO, ASSHOLE!

EXT. STREET - MOMENTS LATER

Jack walks down the sidewalk.  He glances back up at Marla's window as
he crosses the street.  He sees her.  She moves away from the window
and -- Jack's BUMPED -- very lightly -- by a PASSERBY -- it's *Tyler*.

TYLER
What are you doing?

JACK
Uh ... I ... was ... coming back from ... a ... thing ...

Tyler throws an arm around Jack and leads him down the sidewalk.

TYLER
We need to talk.

INT. BOSS'S OFFICE - DAY

Jack steps into the open doorway and lightly knocks against the frame. 
Boss looks up from his large, expensive desk.

JACK
We need to talk.

PG 82

BOSS
Okay.  Where to begin?  With your constant absenteeism?  With your
unpresentable appearance?  I might as well tell you now -- you're going
to be put up for review.

This next line *NOT* in V.O.:

JACK
I Am Joe's Complete Lack Of Surprise.

Boss sits up in his seat, becoming enraged.

JACK
Let's pretend.  You're the Department of Transportation.  And you knew
that our company intentionally left a front seat mounting bracket that
never passed collision tests?  Did nothing about leather seats -- that
were cured in third world countries with a chemical we know causes
birth defects?  Brake linings that fail after a thousand miles.  
Turbochargers that blow up and cut off legs at the knees.  Fuel
injectors that burn people alive.  All of these accidents where "cause
of failure" is stamped "unknown".  I know where the bodies are buried. 
Call it job security.

BOSS
Just who the fuck do you think you are?!  Get out of here!  You're
fired!

JACK
I've got a better idea.  You're going to keep me on payroll as an
outside consultant.  In exchange for my salary, I'll perform the task
of not telling anyone what I know.  I won't need to come into the
office.  I can do this job from home.  Call it early retirement, with
pension.

Boss stands, moves around his desk, glaring with rage.

PG 83

JACK
Yes, I am shit and crazy, to you and this whole fucking world, but I'm
your responsibility.

Jack PUNCHES HIMSELF in the nose.  Blood starts to trickle down.  He
punches himself in the jaw, harder.  He throws himself back, acting as
if the force of the punch knocked him.  His back SLAMS against a framed
painting and SHATTERS the glass.  He and the frame and the glass and
the painting fall to the floor.

JACK (V.O.)
I Am Joe's Smirking Revenge.

JACK
Please don't hit me again.  Please.

Jack gets back to his feet and punches himself in the stomach, then
punches himself in the jaw again.  He reels backwards and falls into a
hanging shelf, ripping it off the wall, sending it's contents flying. 
He falls to the floor again.

JACK (V.O.)
For some reason, I thought of my first fight -- with Tyler.

Jack crawls along the carpet toward Boss, dripping blood.  He tries to
keep up the act, but he sporadically GIGGLES.  He grabs Boss's leg.

JACK
Please ... give me the paychecks like I asked for.  You won't see me
again.  You won't have any trouble.

Jack climbs up Boss's leg.  Boss, aghast, tries to shake him off, and,
in doing so, stumbles back in to his desk, knocking off photos, stacks
of paper, paperweights.

JACK (V.O.)
Under and behind and inside everything this man took for granted,
something horrible had been growing.

Jack crawls up high enough to grab Boss's belt and hoist himself up
further.  He's getting blood all over the Boss's clothes.  Jack SMUDGES
blood from his face onto the knuckles of both Boss's hands.  The
horrified man SCREAMS.

PG 84

JACK (V.O.)
And right then, at our most excellent moment, security guards decided
to walk in.

Two SECURITY GUARDS come inside and gape at the sight.  Behind them
stands a crowd of curious workers, also taking in the sight.

JACK (gurgling blood)
Please don't hit me again.

INT. PAPER ST. HOUSE - JACK'S ROOM - DUSK

Jack, all bloody, lies in his bed, asleep.  He awakens, hearing the
BACK DOOR SLAM.  He painfully hauls himself out of bed.

INT. KITCHEN - MOMENTS LATER

Jack enters to see Tyler taking beers out of the fridge.  Jack waves a
PAYCHECK.

JACK
I did it.

TYLER
That's fucking great!

Jack sees that Tyler is dressed in combat fatigues.  He's splattered
with various colors of PAINT.  There's a rope and rappelling mechanisms
lying on the table.

Tyler nods toward the living room and hands Jack all the beers.

TYLER
Go on in.  We're celebrating.

INT. LIVING ROOM

Jack, a little bewildered, saunters in, carrying the beers.  Tyler does
NOT follow him.  Bob, Ricky and several fight club guys are in front of
the TV.  They are all dressed like Tyler, all splattered with paint.

Jack hands them their beer.  One of the guys is sixteen year old with
an angelic face.  He notices the TV.

ANGEL FACE
SHHH!  They're back to it!

PG 85

Jack looks at the TV as it shows a LIVE shot of a BUILDING, which is
identified at the bottom of the screen as the TRW building.  It has a
GIANT GRINNING FACE PAINTED on it.  The two EYES are broken, charred
windows with SMOKE pouring out.  Firetrucks spray water into the
windows.

REPORTER
Police Commissioner Jacobs has come down ... just a second ... excuse
me, could you tell us what you think this is?

The COMMISSIONER JACOBS, a wrinkled man with baleful eyes, turns to
camera.

COMMISSIONER JACOBS
We believe this is related to the other recent acts of vandalism around
the city.  It's some kind of organized group.  And we're investigating
thoroughly.

Jack turns back and sees Tyler in the archway, watching the TV.  Tyler
pulls back, out of sight.  Jack turns to the others.

JACK
What did you guys do?

They all BURST INTO LAUGHTER, look at Jack and shake their heads.  Jack
just stares at them.  Suddenly, the guys' faces turn to stone.

BOB
The first rule of Project Mayhem is -- you don't ask questions.

Jack stares at them.  CUT TO:

INT. HOTEL BALLROOM - NIGHT

A loud, luxurious banquet ensues.  Commissioner Jacobs guzzles
champagne and puffs on a cigar.  Jack, in a waiter's uniform, serving
another table, stares at Jacobs.  Then, Jack looks apprehensively
toward certain other waiters:  Tyler, Bob, Ricky and Angel Face --
mixed in with the mass of waiters.

INT. BATHROOM - SAME

Commissioner Jacobs enters, puffing the cigar, and walks toward a
urinal.  Jack, Tyler, Bob and Ricky leap out of the corner and attack
him.  Jack's heart isn't in it -- he barely helps the others.  Tyler
knocks the cigar out of Jacob's mouth and slaps a piece of tape over
it.

PG 86

INT. SERVICE ELEVATOR - SAME

Jack holds the door while the others drag the struggling Commissioner
inside.  They hold him down and pull down his pants.  Bob snaps a
rubber band, then reaches down to Commissioner Jacob's crotch.

TYLER
Wrap it around the top of his ball sac.

Ricky holds a knife to Commissioner Jacob's testicles.  Jack,
red-faced, keeps his distance.  Tyler leans in and whispers in the
frightened man's ear.

TYLER
You're not going to continue your "rigorous investigation".  You're
going to publicly state that there is no underground group.  Or --
imagine, the rest of your life with your ball sac flapping empty.

COMMISSIONER JACOBS
No.  Please.  Stop.  Please.

TYLER
One to the *New York Times* and one to the *Los Angeles Times*.  Press
release style.  Remember this.  The people you're after are everyone
you depend on.  We're the people who do your laundry and cook your food
and serve your dinner.  We guard you while you sleep.  We drive the
ambulances.  We process your insurance claims.  We control every part
of your life.  So don't fuck with us.

Ricky makes a dramatic cut with the knife -- he holds up the severed
RUBBER BAND.

EXT. HOTEL - LATER

Jack, Tyler and the others file quickly out the back service entrance. 
Tyler slaps Angel Face's back.  Angel Face smiles at him.  Everyone
splits up in different directions.

PG 87

INT. BASEMENT - NIGHT

Fight club in full swing.  Jack squares off with Angel Face.  He BEATS
the SHIT out of Angel Face with a viciousness heretofore unseen.  The
crowd shouts maniacally, save for Tyler, who watches with an
inscrutable stone face.

Angel Face tries to speak, but Jack pounds him too hard.  Blood flies
everywhere.  The crowd becomes QUIETER.  Finally, Angel Face, on the
floor, is clearly unconscious.  Jack stops, stares at him, numb.  The
crowd seems a little spooked.  Tyler scans the faces, looks at Jack.

EXT. STREET - LATER

Tyler and Jack walk through pools of streetlight.

JACK
I felt like destroying something beautiful.

TYLER
Excellent.

An idling car HONKS.  Tyler leads Jack toward it.  A bruise-faced VALET
PARKER throws keys to Tyler.

VALET
There you go, Mr. Durden.

JACK
After you, *Mr. Durden*.

INT. STOLEN CAR - MOVING - LATER

RAIN GUSHES down.  Tyler drives.  Jack sits slumped in the passenger
seat.  They are BARRELING down a two-lane HIGHWAY, intermittently
illuminated by oncoming headlights.  Jack stews in silence.  Tyler
glances at him.

TYLER
What's the problem?

JACK
Nothing.  Why wasn't I told about "Project Mayhem"?

TYLER
You *were* told about it.

PG 88

JACK
Uh-huh.  Yeah.  Fine.  If you can't talk to me about it ...

TYLER
That's the whole point -- you *don't* talk about it.

JACK
So, I can't even ask?

TYLER
What do you want me to say?  That Project Mayhem will knock over the
pillars of civilization like dominoes?  That it's going to bring about
a prematurely-induced dark age?  Should I E-mail you?  Should I put
this on your "action item list"?

JACK
Fine.

TYLER
Recognize the make and model of this car?

JACK
Yeah -- so what?

TYLER
The front seat mounting bracket never passed collision tests.

Tyler pulls the car into the opposite lane.  HEADLIGHTS in the distance
get closer very, very quickly.

JACK
What are you doing?!

The oncoming car gets closer and closer, honking and flashing it's
lights.  Jack tries to grab the wheel.  Tyler uses one arm to pin down
Jack's arms.  He uses one hand to steer.

JACK
TYLER!  WHAT THE FUCK ARE YOU DOING?!!

TYLER
If you died right now, how would you feel about your life?

JACK
I WOULD FEEL NOTHING ABOUT MY LIFE!  IS THAT WHAT YOU WANT TO HEAR?!

PG 89

TYLER
I want to hear the truth.

The car swerves at the last second.

JACK
Fuck my life.  Fuck fight club!  Fuck you and fuck Marla.  I'm sick of
this shit!  How's that?  Huh?

TYLER
You don't have any concept of what it is to hit bottom.

An oncoming TRUCK honks and flashes it's lights.  It moves to the other
side of the road.  Tyler steers there, too.  The truck moves back;
Tyler moves back.  More honking and flashing.  The truck moves; Tyler
moves.

TYLER
HITTING BOTTOM ISN'T A WEEKEND RETREAT!  IT'S NOT A SEMINAR!  ONLY
AFTER YOU'VE LOST EVERYTHING ARE YOU FREE TO DO ANYTHING!  YOU SEE, YOU
LISTEN, BUT YOU DON'T GET IT!  YOU HAVE TO FORGET EVERYTHING YOU KNOW,
EVERYTHING YOU THINK YOU KNOW!

Just seconds to impact with the oncoming truck and -- Tyler swerves. 
Now the car heads straight for a STALLED CAR on the side of the road,
surrounded by flares.  Jack stops struggling to get his arms free.

JACK
I am nothing in the world compared to you.  I am helpless.  I am stupid
and weak and all I do is want and need things.  I *am* my little shit
job.  I *am* my condo and my Swedish furniture.  I am SHIT!

Tyler lets go of Jack's arms and lets go of the steering wheel.  He and
Jack look at each other as their car barrels toward the stalled car. 
Their faces are illuminated by the light of the flares.

They SMASH into the stalled car.  Both airbags inflate, but the front
seat LURCHES forward, loose, causing the men's legs to bang against the
dash.  Tremendous momentum makes the back of the car whip around and
carry it into a ass-over-teakettle ROLL down the hill.

PG 90

JACK (V.O.)
I'd never been in a car accident.  This was what all those statistics
felt like before I wrote them into my reports.

INT. FAMILY CAR (JACK'S IMAGINATION)

The car that Jack saw, post-wreck, in the warehouse, FLAMING, tumbling
END over END; the FATHER, MOTHER TEENAGE GIRL and BABY all SCREAMING.

INT. TYLER'S STOLEN CAR - RESUMING

The hill goes on further and further -- it's a deep RAVINE.  The car
finally hits the bottom, lying on its roof.

EXT. OVERTURNED CAR

Tyler crawls out and goes around, opening Jack's door.  He drags Jack
out into the mud.  He grabs Jack's face and squeezes it, shaking it.

TYLER
You just had a near-life experience.

INT. JACK'S BEDROOM - LATE NIGHT

Jack lies in bed, staring at the ceiling.  Tyler sits in a chair, next
to the bed, speaking softly.

TYLER
The world I see -- you're stalking elk through the damp canyon forests
around the ruins of Rockefeller Center.  You wear leather clothes that
will last you the rest of your life.  You climb the wrist-thick vines
that wrap the Sears Tower.  You see tiny figures pounding corn and
laying strips of venison on the empty car pool lane of the ruins of a
superhighway.

INT. JACK'S BEDROOM - DAWN

Jack lies in bed, staring at the ceiling.  Tyler is gone.  Faint sounds
of SAWING and HAMMERING.

PG 91

INT. KITCHEN - MOMENTS LATER

Jack sits at the table, sipping coffee.  He's pale, dazed.  He seems
broken.  He hears the faint sounds of sawing and hammering again; he's
unsure of where they're coming from.  He glances out the window, sees
nothing.

Marla walks into the kitchen.  Jack looks up at her.  She looks at him,
unsmiling.  There's a bruise on her face and arm.  She pours herself a
coffee and lights a cigarette.  A beat of silence, then:

MARLA
I'll be out of your way in a sec.

She seems to be as weak as Jack.

JACK
You ... don't have to ... rush off.

MARLA
Sarcastic prick.

JACK
No, really ...

Marla's eyes drift away from his.  Jack gets up, tries to move closer
to her.  She pulls away.  He retreats and they wind up on opposite
sides of the room.  Jack leans against the wall near the BASEMENT DOOR,
which is AJAR.

JACK
Why are we both ... caught up like this ... with ...?

JACK (V.O.)
I came so close to saying Tyler's name, I could feel it vibrate inside
my mouth.

Marla looks at him curiously, waiting.

JACK
Why does a weak person go out and find a strong person to ... hang
onto?

MARLA
It's a real sick relationship.  You don't think I know it?

JACK
Does it *have* to be?

PG 92

MARLA
Does it?

Faint sound of sawing and hammering.  Jack can't quite figure where
it's coming from.

JACK
You hear that?

MARLA
Hear what?

JACK
That ... sawing and hammering.

MARLA
We have to change the subject?  Have we been talking too long?

JACK
I just don't understand what you get out of such a sick relationship.

MARLA
What the hell do *you* get out of it?

Jack turns and sees, through the slim space of the open door, Tyler, at
the bottom of the basement stairs, staring a silent warning.  Jack
turns back to Marla.

JACK
Nevermind.

MARLA
No.  That day you came over to check my breast ...

JACK
Let's just stop right here.

MARLA
Come on!  You *want* to pull yourself out of whatever you're stuck in.

Marla moves slowly toward Jack.

JACK
Conversation over.

Marla strokes Jack's hair.  She sees the kiss-scar on his hand.  She
grabs his hand and studies it.  Jack tries to pull it back, but Marla
keeps a tight grip.

PG 93

MARLA
What is that?!  Who did that?!

JACK
... A person.

MARLA
Guy or girl?

JACK
Why would you ask if it's a guy or a girl?!

MARLA
Why would you get bent if I asked?!

JACK
Go.

MARLA
What does it mean?  You're afraid to say?

JACK
Go!  Go!

Marla kisses Jack's hand, putting her lips right onto the scar, leaving
an imprint of lipstick.  Jack jerks his hand away from her.  He tries
to wipe off the lipstick and it smears.  He unconsciously licks it off.

MARLA
MMMMMMMMMM ... Swallow it.

JACK
Get the hell out of here!

Stung, Marla stomps toward the back door.

MARLA
Go fuck yourself -- that's probably how you like it best.

And out she goes.  Jack watches her stomp through the backyard and out
to the sidewalk.  Tyler comes up from the basement, passes Jack and
goes through the archway.  Sound of his footsteps going up to the
second floor.  Jack goes down the basement steps.

PG 94

INT. BASEMENT - CONTINUOUS

TRIPLE-DECKER BUNKS clutter the basement, as many as can fit into the
space.

JACK
What's this for?

>From upstairs, the sound of the DOORBELL.

INT. LIVING ROOM - MOMENTS LATER

Jack opens the door.  Ricky stands on the porch, staring blankly ahead
in subordinate military style.  He's dressed in black pants, black
shirt, black shoes.  He holds a brown paper bag.  An army surplus
mattress sits in a tied-up roll at his feet.

Jack is about to say something, when Tyler steps past Jack and speaks
very softly to Ricky:

TYLER
I'm sorry.  You're too young to train here.

Tyler steps back inside and shuts the door.

JACK
"Train" here?

TYLER
He's not.  If the applicant is young, we tell him he's too young.  Old,
too old.  Fat, too fat.

JACK
Why?

TYLER
This is how Buddhist temples tested applicants going back for
bah-zillion years.  If the applicant waits at the door for three days
without food, shelter or encouragement, then he can enter and begin
training.

JACK
Begin training?

Tyler grins at him.

PG 95

EXT. PORCH - MOMENTS LATER

Jack bursts out the door, faces Ricky.

JACK
GET OUT OF HERE!  GO!  HE TOLD YOU YOU'RE TOO YOUNG!  GET OUT!

It's clear there will be no response from Ricky, who's like a statue. 
Jack goes back inside, closes the door.

EXT. PORCH - NIGHT

Ricky stands in the same spot.  Jack bursts out with a broom, knocks
the brown paper bag out of Ricky's hand, kicks it off the porch.  Ricky
remains in place, motionless.

JACK
ARE YOU STUPID?!  I TOLD YOU TO GET OUT OF HERE!  YOU'RE NEVER GETTING
INSIDE THIS HOUSE!

EXT. PORCH - MORNING

Ricky in the same spot.  Tyler slinks out the front door, smiling.

TYLER
I'm sorry about the misunderstanding.  Look, friend, it's not the end
of the world.  Just go away.  Nothing personal, but I'm going to have
to call the police.  You're trespassing.

EXT. PORCH - NIGHT

Ricky, same spot.  Jack bursts outside with the broom again.  He WHACKS
Ricky in the shoulder.

JACK
YOU'RE NEVER GETTING THROUGH THIS FUCKING DOOR, YOU STUPID LITTLE
WEASEL!!

INT. JACK'S ROOM - LATER

Jack drinks a beer, smokes a cigarette and stares down at the PORCH,
which he can see from a sideward//downward angle.  Ricky stands in the
same spot.

JACK (V.O.)
Sooner or later, we all just became what Tyler wanted us to be.

PG 96

EXT. PORCH - MORNING

Ricky's in the same spot.  Next to him now is Bob, dressed in black
with brown paper bag and Army surplus mattress.  Tyler steps out the
front door.  Jack lights in the doorway, locking eyes on Bob.

TYLER (to Ricky)
Get your stuff.
(to Bob)
You're too old to train here.  Sorry.

Tyler and Ricky go inside and Tyler slams the door.

INT. 2ND FLOOR LANDING - LATER

Jack stands in the open bathroom doorway, watching Tyler SHAVE off all
of Ricky's HAIR.  When he's done, Tyler gives the top of Ricky's head a
sharp slap.

TYLER
A monkey, ready to be shot up into space, ready to sacrifice himself
for Project Mayhem.

And, so, all those with shaved heads will henceforth be termed "SPACE
MONKEYS".

EXT. PORCH - LATER

Jack looks out the window.  Bob continues to stand, motionless.  Ricky
comes out the front door with the broom. 

RICKY
YOU'RE TOO FUCKING OLD!  GET OUT OF HERE!

Ricky WHACKS Bob with the broom several times, then goes back inside,
SLAMMING THE DOOR.  CUT TO:

EXT. PORCH - NIGHT

CLOSE ON JACK'S FACE, staring out the window.

VOICE
YOU'RE TOO SKINNY!  GET OUT OF HERE!

FULL BACK TO REVEAL a SPACE MONKEY we've never seen before, with the
shaved head, whacking a SKINNY APPLICANT with the broom.

PG 97

INT. LIVING ROOM - SAME

Jack pulls back from the window.  SPACE MONKEYS, all dressed in black,
all with shaved heads, are ALL OVER THE PLACE.  There are tables set up
for them to wrap bars of soap.  Jack lopes into the 

INT. KITCHEN - CONTINUOUS

Where Space Monkeys render fat and make soap.  Several, off to the
side, stir a large vat of RICE.  One of them recites a memorized
statement:

FRECKLED SPACE MONKEY
"You are not a beautiful and unique snowflake.  You are the same
decaying organic matter as everything else.  We are all part of the
same compost pile."

JACK (V.O.)
Planet Tyler

Jack dips a spoon into the rice vat and chomps on some rice in an
irritable way.

JACK (V.O.)
It could be worse.  I could get hit by lightning and my head could burn
down to a smoldering baseball and my zipper could weld shut.

He moves back out to the

INT. LIVING ROOM - CONTINUOUS

And tromps up the steps to the 2nd floor landing.

INT. TYLER'S ROOM - CONTINUOUS

Jack enters.  Bob reads a book and makes marks on a chart.  All along
the floor are baskets; each one is labeled with a number in sequence:
"1, 2," etc.  The first ten are under a sign that says "WILMINGTON". 
Then, there's a sign over some that says "NEW YORK", then "CHICAGO",
and other cities.  There are dozens of BOOKS on FINANCE.  Jack looks in
basket number "1" and sees the word "CITIBANK" at the top of a page. 
He starts flipping through it; then the next basket.

Bob grabs Jack's hand and leads him away from the baskets.

BOB
The first rule of Project Mayhem is you don't ask questions.

PG 98

JACK
This is me, Bob.  Tyler's been gone for over a week.  What the hell is
going on?

BOB
The first rule of Project Mayhem is you --

JACK
Right.

Jack leaves the room.

INT. KITCHEN - MOMENTS LATER

Jack barges in among the laboring Space Monkeys.  They pinch herbs into
the soap mix.  They also use vodka.  Jack grabs a bottle of vodka and
takes a long pull off it.

JACK (V.O.)
I had to hug the walls, being a mouse trapped inside this clockwork of
space monkeys, cooking and working and sleeping in teams.  The house
became a living thing, wet on the inside from so many people sweating
and breathing.  So many people moving, the house moved.

The PHONE RINGS.  Jack snatches it.  All the Monkeys stare at him.

JACK
Project Mayhem.

TYLER'S VOICE
Don't answer the phone like that.

Jack turns away from the others, moves to a corner, talks sotto voce.

JACK
Tyler!  Where have you been?

TYLER'S VOICE
Don't ask questions.

There's a tense pause.

JACK (V.O.)
I Am Joe's Broken Heart because Tyler dumped me.  Because I'm just
another cog ...

PG 99

TYLER'S VOICE
Be quiet and listen.

Jack reacts with surprise -- did Tyler hear his thoughts?

TYLER'S VOICE
I'll tell you everything when I get back.  Right now, you gotta do
something for me.

JACK
Me?  When?

TYLER'S VOICE
Tonight.

EXT. FRONT PORCH - LATER

Jack, Bob, and two other Space Monkeys step out the front door, laden
with boxes and equipment.

SKINNY SPACE MONKEY
"We are the all-singing, all-dancing crap of the world".

The group of four steps off the porch and heads for a VAN.

EXT. PARK - NIGHT

A piece of ART adorns the top of a hill: a metal TOWER, wide at the
base and a hundred feet high, in design somewhat similar to the Eifel
Tower.  At the top is a giant GLOBE made of circular poles and wires.

Jack, Bob and the other two monkeys attach the explosive packets to the
globe; wire the packets together; use sandbags to cover the packets.

EXT. PARK - LATER

The group of four huddle behind some bushes, staring at the globe.  Bob
holds a small metal electronic box with a button -- a detonator.  He
presses the button.

A RAPID SERIES of EXPLOSIONS runs from the base of the tower to the
top, along the four main structural supports.  They are contained,
shaped blasts.  The tower crumbles straight down.  Bob turns to smile
at Jack.

BOB
Exactly the way it was supposed to work.

PG 100

The globe falls free, bangs into the top of the hill and begins to
roll.  When it gets to the street, it bounces onto the top of a parked
LIMO -- and becomes a FLAMING, raised "GUTTERBALL" -- it never hits the
street -- it rolls over one parked limo or expensive luxury car after
another, crunching the roofs, causing the windows to explode outward. 
Fifty cars get this treatment.

Then, it arrives at the lobby of a HOTEL, BROADSIDES a couple of limos,
CAROMS off them, TURNS and rolls directly into the front of a large
(closed) STARBUCKS, SMASHING DOWN the windows and the front door and
setting the place ON FIRE.

EXT. PARK - AERIAL VIEW

As Jack, Bob and the two other Monkeys FLEE, LAUGHING hysterically at
their handiwork.  They split up and move in different directions.

MOVE IN ON JACK, sprinting, keeping hidden by bushes.  SIRENS can be
heard.  He's stripping off his ski mask, his gloves, his combat gear --
as he runs.  Underneath are street clothes.

JACK (V.O.)
In that moment I "clicked".  I became what Tyler wanted.  I was his
limb, his appendage -- an extension of his will, nothing more.  And he
knew it.  I could feel him knowing it.

Jack dumps the wad of clothes into a trashcan and pulls up the
surrounding trash to cover them.  He breaks into a sprint again,
heading for the edge of the park.

GUNSHOT.  Jack's smile fades.  He stops, looks toward the direction
from which the sound came.  He turns, heads down along a row of hedges.
 He comes to a 

INT. CONCRETE STAIRCASE - CONTINUOUS

And moves to the top step, looking down.  A COP is near the bottom,
running down to the sidewalk.  Next to a STREETLAMP LIES a ONE of the
MONKEYS in full combat attire and ski mask.  The body is MOTIONLESS,
SPRAWLED.  In the hand is the DETONATOR -- looking somewhat like a gun.
 The Cop pulls off the ski mask, revealing the DEAD FACE of Bob, a
BULLETHOLE through the head.

Jack flinches backwards as if punched in the stomach.  He gasps for
breath.  The Cop looks up and catches sight of Jack.  He lifts his gun
and his PB radio.  Jack jerks back out of sight.

PG 101

EXT. PARK - CONTINUOUS

Jack hobbles along.  Nearby, from beyond a hedge, he hears the
crackling of a PB with a VOICE coming from it.  Then:

COP'S VOICE (into PB)
Yeah.  We found some clothes.

Jack, sweating like a pig, picks up his pace and heads for the edge of
the park.

EXT. PAPER ST. HOUSE - NIGHT

Jack, panting, white as a ghost, trembling, approaches from the
sidewalk.  He sees the front door open and four Space Monkeys come out,
carrying LUGGAGE.

BIG-EARED MONKEY (a solemn chant)
We are now the ...

OTHER MONKEYS & BIG-EARED (unison)
... right hands of Tyler Durden.

Jack steps up onto the porch and sees that they are all holding FLIGHT
COUPONS.  Jack notices that all of them have the KISS-SCAR on their
left hands.  They ignore him with military demeanor and walk down to
the sidewalk and head for the bus stop.

JACK (V.O.)
Under and behind and inside everything I took for granted, something
horrible had been growing.

INT. LIVING ROOM - CONTINUOUS

Jack walks inside to see a Space Monkey, BEET-RED but silent, holding
out his hands while LYE BURNS the inside of the TOPS of his FINGERS. 
Other Monkeys sit and await the process.

JACK (V.O.)
They were using lye to burn off their fingerprints.

INT. TYLER'S ROOM

Jack barges into the room, goes to the desk and rifles through drawers.
 His elbow bangs against the top of an ANSWERING MACHINE.  It plays
MESSAGES.

PG 102

MARLA'S VOICE
Look, don't get bent, okay?  But ... there's a therapist that I think
could really help you.  Give me a call.  Okay?

Click.  Next message:

DETECTIVE STERN'S VOICE
This is Detective Stern with the arson unit.  I've called four times in
the last two days.  I need you to come in for some further questioning.

Jack shivers, snaps OFF the machine, then more furiously continues his
search.  He finally finds flight coupons -- both used and unused.  The
used ones have the flight information, including the destination
cities.  He stuffs all of them into his pocket.

CLOSE SHOT:  SIGN:  "LAGUARDIA INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT".

INT. BAR - NIGHT

Jack walks in and sees several MALE PATRONS with FIGHT BRUISES.  Jack
goes to the bar, sidles next to the bruised men and the BRUISED
BARTENDER.  They stare at him.

JACK
This is an emergency.  I'm looking for Tyler Durden.

BRUISED PATRON
Never heard of him.  Sir.

He and the other bruised patrons and the bartender WINK at Jack and
crack slight smiles.

MONTAGE - DAY & NIGHT:

"WELCOME TO" AIRPORT SIGNS -- Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas, Phoenix, Los
Angeles".

FACES -- bruised, smiling, tight-lipped.

JACK (V.O.)
In every city, I branched out from the airport to downtown and checked
bars.  There was always a fight club.  Tyler was setting up franchises,
all over the country.

PG 103

INT. ANOTHER BAR - NIGHT

Jack walks in and sits at the bar.  The BARTENDER wears a NECK BRACE
and has a black eye.

BARTENDER
Welcome back, Sir.  No one's in here.  It's always empty the day after
fight club.

JACK
Talk to me.  Have you ever met Tyler Durden?

BARTENDER
Is this a test, Sir?

JACK
Yeah, it's a test.

BARTENDER
You were in here last Thursday night.  You were standing right there,
asking me about how good our security is.  And it's tight as a drum.

JACK
Who do you think I am?

JACK (V.O.)
Please return your seatbacks to their full upright and locked position.

BARTENDER
You're the person who did *this* to me.

The Bartender shows Jack his hand -- it has the kiss-shaped scar.

BARTENDER
You're Tyler Durden, Sir.

INT. HOTEL ROOM - NIGHT

Jack bursts inside, runs to the phone, punches a number.  He doesn't
bother to turn on the lamp.

INTERCUT WITH

PG 104

INT. MARLA'S ROOM - SAME

Marla answers the phone.

MARLA
Yeah?

JACK
It's me.  Have we ever had sex?

MARLA
What kind of stupid question is that?!!

JACK
Is it stupid because the answer's "yes" or because the answer's "no"?

MARLA
Is this a trick?

JACK
Will you just answer, for God's sake?!

MARLA
Oh, you mean, you want to know if I think it was "making love" or just
two animals going at it?

JACK
So we *did* make love?

MARLA
Is that what *you're* calling it?

JACK
ANSWER THE QUESTION!!!

MARLA
You fuck me, then snub me.  You love me, you hate me, you show your
sensitive side, you turn back into an asshole!

JACK
Oh, God.

MARLA
Is that a pretty accurate description of this relationship?

JACK
What's my name?

PG 105

MARLA
Tyler Durden.

JACK (V.O.)
We've just lost cabin pressure.

MARLA
I'm coming over.

As Marla hangs up, we END INTERCUT.  Jack stares at the receiver a
beat, then realizes ...

JACK
Oh, shit!  No!  I'm out of town!

He punches Marla's number like a maniac.  Listens ... just ringing and
ringing.  He turns, sees TYLER -- sitting on the bed, staring at him
with an ominous poker face.  Jack drops the receiver.  The room is only
lit by dim moonlight through the window.

TYLER
You broke your promise.

JACK
Why do people think I'm you?

TYLER
Because we happen to share the same body.

JACK
What the hell are you talking about?

TYLER
Sometimes *I* control it and you imagine watching me.

INT. BAR BASEMENT - NIGHT (JACK'S MEMORY)

Jack stands near the back of the crowd as Tyler stands in the middle of
the light.

TYLER
The first rule of fight club is --

JUMP CUT - SAME SHOT - (ALTERED FLASHBACK) -- it's JACK in the light,
talking, behaving like TYLER.

JACK
-- you don't talk about fight club.

PG 106

INT. HOTEL ROOM - RESUMING

Jack gasps and wheezes.  Tyler grins and nods.

JACK
But we fought --

TYLER
When *you're* controlling the body, you see me and hear me.  But no one
else does.

INT. AIRPLANE CABIN - IN FLIGHT - NIGHT (ALTERED FLASHBACK)

Jack sits next to an empty seat and "looks" at the blank air beside
him, eyes focusing on "someone" close.

JACK
What do you do Tyler?
(pause; listens to reply)
I mean -- for a living.

Jack listens to the reply, then laughs.

INT. HOTEL ROOM - RESUMING

Jack has trouble catching his breath.

JACK
What about when we were together around other people?

TYLER
You never talked.

EXT. PARK - NIGHT (ALTERED FLASHBACK)

Jack (Tyler) has his face right in front of the Police Commissioner's.

JACK ("TYLER")
We'll send one ball to the "New York Times" and one ball to the "Los
Angeles Times".  Sort of press release style.

PG 107

INT. HOTEL ROOM - RESUMING

Tyler sits down on the bed, takes Jack's hand.  He presses his lips to
the kiss-scar.

TYLER
And when you fall asleep, I go places and do things without you.

EXT. BUILDING (FLASHBACK)

We see that the building is "TRW".  Jack, Bob, Ricky, Angel Face and
another GUY rappel down the die and start SPRAYING PAINT.  Everyone is
more or less paired off.  Jack IS "TYLER" in his demeanor, mannerisms,
speech.  He's next to Angel Face.

JACK ("TYLER") (to Angel Face)
You are not your job.  You are not how much money you have in the bank.

Suddenly, the TWO WINDOWS SHATTER OUTWARD and two of the men yell out
the windows:

BRUISED MAN #1
I AM NOT MY JOB!

BRUISED MAN #2 
I AM NOT HOW MUCH MONEY I HAVE IN THE BANK!

INT. HOTEL ROOM - RESUMING

Jack shakes his head in disbelief.

JACK
But you ... you ... you rent the house.

TYLER
The house is rented in your name.

JACK
You're a projection?  A personality disorder?  A psychogenic fugue
state?

TYLER
Fuck that.  You're *my* hallucination.

PG 108

JACK (points to his body)
I was here first.

TYLER
Who's done more with it?

JACK
You're not going to do any more with it.

TYLER
What are you going to do?  You couldn't even figure this out.  It's
been staring you in the face for months.  I had to drop my busy
schedule and come here and tell you.  How are you going to fuck with
me?  You think there's any possibility that I haven't prepared for?  Do
you think anyone you care about is safe?

Jack quivers with shock, shaking his head, sweating more profusely.

JACK
No.  This is all ... it's not possible.  Tyler.  Tyler ... it's a joke,
right?  Right?

Jack FAINTS and falls to the floor, UNCONSCIOUS.

INT. HOTEL ROOM - DAY

Jack's eyes snap open.  He shoots to his feet.

JACK
Tyler ... ?

He remembers the revelations of the previous night ... he looks at
himself in the mirror.  A sledgehammer of emotions hits him.  He looks
at the clock -- 1:35p.m.

BAM!

INT. HALLWAY

The room door slams against the wall as Jack bursts out of the room,
SPRINTING for the stairs.  Fuck the luggage.  

INT. STAIRWELL

Jack takes three steps at a time.

PG 109

INT. LOBBY

Jack storms for the front door, passing the length of the front desk. 
A DESK CLERK calls out to him.

DESK CLERK
SIR?!

Jack catches sight of the Clerk, who waves a piece of paper.

DESK CLERK
Please initial the list of phone calls.

Jack snatches the bill and looks at it.  There's a MASS of PHONE
NUMBERS.

JACK
When were these made?

DESK CLERK
It says right there, Sir.  Between two a.m. and five thirty a.m.

Jack grins.  He initials the bill.  The Clerk gives him a copy.  Jack
stuffs the bill into his pocket and disappears out the door.

INT. AIRPLANE CABIN - IN FLIGHT - DAY

Jack sits, staring out the window, his face set hard.

EXT. AIRPORT DRIVE - SUNSET

Jack sprints to the curb and leaps onto a taxi.

EXT. MARLA'S HOTEL - SUNSET

The taxi pulls to a halt by the curb.  Jack leaps out and runs up the
front steps.

INT. HOTEL STAIRS - CONTINUOUS

Jack sprints up the steps, taking two or three at a time.  He gets to a
landing and turns and runs down to the end of the

PG 110

INT. HALLWAY

Where he pounds on Marla's door.  She opens it.  He endures her baleful
gaze for a beat.

MARLA
Your whacked-out, bald feaks threw me out of the house.  I thought they
were going to kill me.  They almost broke my arm.

JACK
I'm sorry, I ...

Jack takes both her hands in his.

JACK
Marla, I'm going to tell you something and it's going to take a
tremendous act of faith on your part to believe me.

MARLA
Here comes an avalanche of bullshit.

JACK
-- A little *more* faith than that.

MARLA
Spill it.

INT. MARLA'S ROOM - CONTINUOUS

Jack leads her toward the bed.

JACK
Look, did you notice a big difference between me when we were having
sex and when ... we weren't?

MARLA
Did I notice?  You're manic-depressive.  It's like a neon sign all over
you.

JACK
No.  It's worse than that.

Jack sits on the bed, pulling Marla down next to him.  They and the
sheets and covers SLIDE OFF onto the floor.  Jack keeps his composure
and looks into her eyes.

JACK
Tyler is my split personality.

PG 111

MARLA
Then, who are you?

Jack takes out his wallet, shows Marla his driver's license.

MARLA
You gave me a fake name?  What a jerk.

JACK
*I* didn't give you the fake name -- a *fake person* did.  Listen,
those people all over the house -- you're in danger.

MARLA
Okay, what do you want?  You want me to create my own wonder-bitch
personality to match?  So we can be a foursome?

JACK
I WANT YOU TO FUCKING BELIEVE ME!!  YOU WANTED TO TALK?!  WELL,
*HERE'S* OUR FUCKING TALK!!!

Jack's eyes well up with tears.  He turns away from her.  Marla's face
softens.  She strokes Jack's hair, turns his face to look at her.

MARLA
I'm sorry.  This split personality thing is ...

A beat of silence.  She squeezes his hand; he squeezes back.  He looks
at her, working up some nerve.

JACK
I've go to know something.  Why did you respond to Tyler?  Instead of
me.  Sexually.

MARLA
I ... uh ... I don't know what to say -- *you're* Tyler.

JACK
Okay, however you want to say it -- the abusive side of me -- the
asshole who treated  you like shit and made you leave in the morning.

PG 112

MARLA
What do you want?  You want me to say I'm shit and I deserve to be
treated like shit?  Well, I AM!  And that's how you GOT ME OFF!! AND
YOU *KNOW IT*!!!

Jack touches her face and she slaps his hand away.  He sighs and gets
to his feet.  He pulls out an airline FLIGHT COUPON and shows it to
her.

JACK
I want you to get out of town for awhile.  Whether you believe me or
not, you're in *real* danger.  Is there someplace you can go?

Marla grabs the flight coupon, looks it over.

MARLA
There's plenty of places I'd like to go.

Jack digs into his pocket and produces a wad of cash.  Marla roughly
seizes the cash, checks out the amount.

JACK
Leave as soon as possible.  Go to a rural little town, away from any
major city.  Go now.  Okay?  Please.  Promise?

MARLA
Count on it.  And I'm not paying this back -- I consider it "asshole
tax".

JACK
I agree.  More than you know.

Marla's expression of rage becomes muddled with confusion over Jack's
almost spiritual tenderness.   Jack starts toward the door.  A WAVE OF
DROWSINESS and FATIGUE hits him.  He staggers, eyes closing.  He drops
onto a chair for a beat and rests his hand over his face.

He SNAPS AWAKE.  Marla is GONE.  Jack bolts up out of the seat.

JACK
Marla?!

PG 113

INT. HALLWAY

Jack leaps out of the room, looks down the hall in both directions. 

JACK
Marla?!

EXT. PAPER STREET - SUNSET

The taxi screeches to a halt.  Jack leaps out.

JACK
Wait here.

INT. PAPER ST.  HOUSE - MOMENTS LATER

Jack walks inside to find it completely EMPTY and DESERTED.  He gawks
at the bathtub and canisters that hold vast amounts of liquid.  He sees
bottles labeled "nitric acid".  He TIP-TOES to the

INT. KITCHEN

And picks up the phone.  He pulls out the hotel bill and scans the
phone numbers.  Through the window, the LAST bit of SUNLIGHT slowly
SINKS.

Jack punches the first number.

VOICE (from phone)
Maintenance.

A brief silence while Jack absorbs this and adjusts.

JACK
Uh, excuse me.  I'm not sure I have the right number.  I've been
calling maintenance departments all over the city, regarding the water
supply.  Which maintenance department is this?

VOICE
Very good, Sir.

JACK
Excuse me?

PG 124

VOICE
Don't worry about us, Sir.  We're solid.

Jack hangs up the phone.  He punches the next number.

DIFFERENT VOICE (from phone)
Maintenance.

JACK (imitating Tyler)
Give me your position.

DIFFERENT VOICE (baffled)
Huh?  Who's this?

JACK
Oh, excuse me.  I'm calling from the water company.  I've mixed up my
phone numbers.  Which maintenance department am I talking to?

DIFFERENT VOICE
You almost had me there, Sir.  Everything's A-okay here.

Jack hangs up the phone.  He punches the next number.

ANOTHER DIFFERENT VOICE (from phone)
Maintenance.

Jack hangs up; punches the next number.

YET ANOTHER DIFFERENT VOICE (from phone)
Maintenance.

Jack hangs up; punches the next number.

EVEN YET ANOTHER VOICE (from phone)
Maintenance.

A beat while Jack thinks.

JACK
There's been a change in the plan.

EVEN YET ANOTHER VOICE
You told me you'd say that, Sir.

PG 115

JACK
I don't care what I told you -- there's *really* a change of plan!

EVEN YET ANOTHER VOICE
You told me you'd say *that*, too, Sir.

JACK
Now, listen to me, you stupid fuck!  I've got the phone numbers mixed
up!  Tell me where you are!  Now!

EVEN YET ANOTHER VOICE
This is a very good test, Sir.  You sound like you mean it.

Jack hangs up the phone and KICKS IT.  He flushes red, looks around at
passersby.  He lifts the receiver again and punches the next number on
the hotel bill.

SCRATCHY VOICE (from phone)
Mason Industrial Electronics.

JACK
This is Tyler Durden.

SCRATCHY VOICE (harsh whisper)
Are you outta your fucking mind?!  What the fuck are you doing, calling
me in the daytime?!

JACK
I ... have some questions about ...

SCRATCHY VOICE
Jesus!  I showed your guys how to use it!  A four-year-old could take
that shit and break through any security system in the world!  If you
can't then fuck you, moron!  Now, don't ever call me again!!

Click.  Disconnect.  Jack looks at the receiver, hangs it up.

PG 116

EXT. LOU'S TAVERN - NIGHT

Jack gets out of the cab, turns to the CABBIE.

JACK
I gotta have you wait again.  Leave the meter running.

The Cabbie grins.

CABBIE
There's no charge, Mr. Durden.

Jack gawks at him, backs away.

INT. LOU'S TAVERN - SAME

Jack darts inside and signals to Irvine.  Irvine comes out from behind
the bar and he and Jack move to a corner.  Other men with BRUISED FACES
turn and watch them.

JACK
Look, I need to know where the nitroglycerin was taken.

Irvine scowls at him a beat, then slowly smiles.

IRVINE
Right, Mr. Durden.

JACK
This isn't a test.  There's been a mix-up.

IRVINE
You told me you'd say that.

JACK
Where are all the maintenance departments?!

IRVINE
You told me you'd say that, too.

Jack bristles with rage.  He grabs Irvine's shirt collar.

JACK
Did I tell you I'd call you a motherfucking asswipe dickhead?!

IRVINE
Yes, you did.

Marla walks into the tavern, makes a beeline for Jack.

PG 117

JACK
WHAT THE HELL ARE YOU DOING HERE?!

MARLA
You told me to meet you here at ten till.

JACK
WHEN?!

MARLA
Back in my room.  When you dropped into the chair.

JACK
SHIT!

Irvine and a couple of the bruised-faced guys grin at Marla and take a
few steps towards her.  Jack grabs her and drags her out the door.

EXT. LOU'S TAVERN

Jack ignores the waiting cabbie and heads for the main road.  He's
stomping along at a brisk pace.  His face hardens into a mask of
psychotic determination.  He pulls Marla with him onto a run-down side
street.

He darts into a 

INT. PAWN SHOP

He immediately points to something high on a shelf.

JACK
Let me see that trumpet.

The OWNER, a huge, gruff man, pushes a ladder to the spot starts to
climb.  Jack throws himself onto the countertop near the register,
looks around, pulls up a HANDGUN.

OWNER
Hey!

Marla GASPS.  Jack checks the clip -- it's fully-loaded.  He sprints
for the door, dragging Marla.

EXT. STREET - CONTINUOUS

Jack steps out into traffic.  A LEXUS screeches to a halt.  Jack goes
to the DRIVER'S door and whips it open.

JACK
Police emergency.

PG 118

DRIVER
Bullshit!

Jack shoves the gun barrel into the Driver's temple.  The Driver gets
out of the car and FLEES.  Jack points the gun at Marla and motions her
to get into the car.  Overwhelmed by all this, she complies.  Jack
leaps behind the wheel and stomps on the gas.

EXT. GREYHOUND BUS STATION - LATER

Jack drags Marla into the passenger loading area.  A Greyhound bus is
taking on passengers.  Jack sees the DESTINATION -- PHOENIX -- and he
impulsively averts his eyes, but too late.

JACK
SHIT!  I can't know where it's going!  Come on, let's find another one.

Jack drags her to another loading bus.  He keeps his eyes averted from
the DESTINATION sign.

JACK
Get on the bus.

MARLA (reading the destination)
But I don't want to go to --

JACK
SHUT UP!  Don't tell me where it's going!

MARLA
But, the people there talk funny and their teeth are rotten.

JACK
Shit!  Now, I know it's the rural South!

Jack jams the gun barrel into Marla's ribs.

JACK
Get on that fucking bus right now!

Marla starts for the bus.  Jack keeps himself from seeing the
destination sign, but watches Marla get on board.  Then, the doors
close.  Then, the bus pulls away.  Then, the bus gets to the end of the
road and turns a corner.

Jack turns and walks off the passenger platform and out into the

PG 119

EXT. STREET NIGHT

He sees a Space Monkey on the corner, watching him.  He looks down and
sees another Monkey in the opposite direction, also watching him.

JACK (V.O.)
They probably had a map of the city with little push pins.  I felt like
a migrating goose on "Wild Kingdom.  Well, fine.  They could watch me
do *this*".

INT. POLICE STATION - NIGHT

Jack walks past desks of PLAINCLOTHES DETECTIVES until he sees a
private office.  He glances down at a business card, then keeps moving
forward.

INT. OFFICE - CONTINUOUS

Jack steps inside the office to see Detective Stern at the desk.

JACK
I want you to arrest me.  I'm the leader of a terrorist organization
that's about to set off bombs all over the city.

Detective Stern scowls at Jack.

INT. HALLWAY - MOMENTS LATER

Jack, handcuffed, is led by Detective Stern.  Several other DETECTIVES
follow.  A somber mood prevails.

INT. INTERROGATION ROOM - CONTINUOUS

Stern enters and leads Jack to a table.  All the other Detectives file
inside.  The last one closes the door.  Dim light from a single bulb
overhead creates the tone of a torture chamber.  Cigarette smoke
becomes thick.  Jack sighs with relief.  It's finally over.  The
Detectives all stare harshly at Jack.

Then, they all BURST into HYSTERICAL LAUGHTER.  They slap and punch
Jack's shoulder.

DETECTIVE STERN
Very good, Mr. Durden.

Jack uses all his strength to stifle his utter shock.  He forces a thin
smile.

PG 120

DETECTIVE STERN
Operation Domino has everyone a little skittish right now.  But it's
all going like clockwork.

Jack, ready to explode, keeps the smile plastered on his face and
forces his hand -- like a palsy victim -- to form the gesture "thumbs
up".  The Detectives give him the same gesture in reply.

EXT. BACK OF POLICE STATION - NIGHT

A door opens and Jack is playfully shoved outside.  LAUGHTER of
Detectives rings out.  Jacks starts to walk away from the police
station.

EXT. STREET - CONTINUOUS

Jack steps out into the street.  In a state of shock, he lopes forward,
dizzy.

JACK
... Operation Domino ... "fall like dominoes" ... SHIT!  ONE, TWO,
THREE!  YES!

Passersby look at him as if he were a homeless, insane guy.

JACK
THE BANKS!  What was the first one?!  Number one, number one ...
*CITIBANK*!

INT. STOLEN LEXUS - MOMENTS LATER

Jack RACES along the streets, swerving and passing cars, HONKING. 
After a beat a MOTORCYCLE COP appears behind Jack and turns on his
SIREN and FLASHING LIGHT.  Jack reflexively slows down.  The motorcycle
moves up beside Jack and the COP SMILES, waving Jack forward.  The Cop
provides an ESCORT.  The Lexus turns a corner and heads for the 

EXT. CITIBANK BUILDING - CONTINUOUS

Jack leaps out of the car.  He sprints into the 

INT. LOBBY - NIGHT

Two Space Monkeys take over the escort and lead Jack toward the
elevators.

JACK
I'll take the stairs.

Jack darts to the side, throws open the stairwell door.

PG 121

INT. STAIRWELL

Jack dashes DOWN the steps.

INT. PARKING AREA

Jack races from the stairwell into the parking area, eyes combing the
place.  He darts from one SUPPORT POST to another, his eyes frantically
searching.

He moves around a support post and sees -- Tyler, sitting on the
ground, his back against the post.

TYLER
Looking for something?

JACK
Where are the charges at?!

TYLER
Don't end a sentence with a preposition.

JACK
WHERE ARE THE CHARGES AT, *FUCKHEAD*?!!!

TYLER
Listen to "Elephant Balls" ... shit, slinging a gun.  *Where did I go
right*?

JACK
I'll find them.

Jack moves away, continues looking around support posts.

TYLER
There's eight floors of parking.

JACK
I don't give a shit.

TYLER
You do -- because you don't have enough time.

Tyler grins, points to his watch.

TYLER
... Ten minutes.

Jack stalks back toward Tyler, gun raised.

PG 122

JACK
TELL ME WHERE THE CHARGES ARE!

TYLER
They're all up and down the building.  They're not just here.  If you
tried to stupidly pull a fuse on a charge, you'd just cause it to blow
up.  The charges are set to go in a specific order -- so that the
building will implode and collapse.  If you *did* defuse one of the
charges, you'd fuck up the sequence, and the building might fall the
wrong way.  Why don't you just find a television and watch the party?

JACK
I'm awake.  I have control of the body.  You can't give orders.

TYLER
I don't have any orders left to give.  It's all set.

Jack boils over, then cracks.  He drops the gun, falls to his knees and
clutches at Tyler.  He touches Tyler's face.

JACK
Tyler.  You're real, aren't you?  This is all a big joke, isn't it? 
You *are* real, you son of a bitch!

Tears well up in Jack's eyes.  He hugs Tyler.  Tyler hugs him back.

TYLER
We're both real.

Jack squeezes harder, then lifts his head -- he's hugging ANOTHER JACK.
 The real Jack gasps, flinches backwards, landing on the gun.  He
turns, grabs the gun, and turns back around.  Fifty feet away, Tyler,
standing, leans against a pillar.  He winks.

Jack raises the gun, turns it around and aims it at his own head.

JACK
There's only one way to stop all this.

Jack shoves the barrel into his mouth.

PG 123

TYLER
You better not.  If our body is found dead, the Space Monkeys have
orders to kill Marla.

JACK
Marla is gone -- and you don't know where.

Tyler's hand suddenly DARTS INTO FRAME, CLOSE-UP and SNATCHES the gun.

NEW ANGLE

Tyler, laughing, holding the gun, dashes for the elevator.  Jack
sprints after him.

INT. ELEVATOR

Jack manages to leap inside just as the door closes.  He lunges at
Tyler and fights for the gun.  Tyler, laughing, manages to retain it. 
The elevator climbs rapidly -- blinking numbers indicate floors
whizzing past.

INT. TOP FLOOR LOBBY

The elevator doors open and the struggling pair whirl out and toward
the GLASS WALLS.  Tyler SHOVES Jack's HEAD against the window, turns it
so Jack is looking down.

ANGLE ON STREET

A GREYHOUND BUS sits idling right by the front lobby doors, having been
allowed through the cordon.

INT. TOP FLOOR LOBBY - RESUMING

As Tyler and Jack continue to stare downward.

JACK
That's ... not the bus.

TYLER
You know it is.

Tyler swings Jack away from the window and shoves him backwards.

TYLER
Now, can you grasp that there's nothing you can do?

Jack raises the gun, aiming at Tyler.  Tyler laughs, but flinches --
just as Jack FIRES.  The bullet chews out a CHUNK of the wall.

PG 124

JACK
I'm not going to kill myself.  I'm going to kill *you*.

Tyler laughs, but he starts rapidly moving down the hallway.

TYLER
You can't kill me!  How can you kill me?!

Jack FIRES again, missing Tyler.  Tyler breaks into a sprint.  Jack
does the same.

INT. HALLWAY

Jack turns a corner, sees Tyler at the end of the section of hallway,
heading for an intersection.  Jack aims the gun at Tyler.  RAPID CUT
TO:

SECURITY CAMERA POV - HALLWAY

Jack aims the gun at himself.  RAPID CUT TO:

INT. HALLWAY

Jack FIRES.  As Tyler flinches down -- RAPID CUT TO:

SECURITY CAMERA POV - HALLWAY

*Jack* flinches down, having shot at himself.  RAPID CUT TO:

INT. HALLWAY

Jack resumes sprinting until he turns a corner to

INT. NEW SECTION OF HALLWAY

Jack sees Tyler turn, freeze, then leap sideways toward a room.  Jack
FIRES.  The bullet GRAZES Tyler's leg.  RAPID CUT TO:

SECURITY CAMERA POV - HALLWAY

Jack, with the gun still aimed at his own leg, falls backwards,
bleeding from  the graze wound his just gave himself.  RAPID CUT TO:

INT. HALLWAY

Jack pulls himself to his feet, and, his face now looking completely
insane, runs with his limp, holding the gun up, ready to fire.  He
turns a corner to --

PG 125

INT. TOP FLOOR LOBBY

And suddenly, Tyler LEAPS onto Jack.  RAPID CUT TO:

SECURITY CAMERA POV - LOBBY

Jack crumples to the floor and wrestles with himself.  He punches
himself, he tries to trap pin his own arms, he kicks himself.  RAPID
CUT TO:

INT. TOP FLOOR LOBBY

Tyler leaps to his feet and dashes away.  Jack pulls himself up and
follows into a --

INT. LARGE SOCIAL ROOM

With floor-to-ceiling windows showing a view of the city.  There are a
HUNDRED DUFFEL BAGS lining the floor, along the walls.

Tyler leaps onto Jack seizes the gun.  Jack holds onto Tyler.  Tyler
shoves the gun barrel into Jack's mouth.

TYLER
Okay -- let's kill you -- let's kill *both* of us.  Be a martyr for the
cause.

Tyler pushes Jack against a glass wall.  Jack, exhausted, is losing his
spirit.

JACK (V.O.)
I think this is about where we came in.

TYLER
Two minutes.

Jack collapses to the floor.  Tyler moves down with him, keeping the
gun in Jack's mouth.  He sits on Jack.

JACK
Either way -- the building blows us up or you pull the trigger -- it'll
finally be over.

TYLER
This building isn't going to blow up.  It's the observation room. 
Pay-per-view.  So, what are you going to do?  You don't even have the
guts to make a decision.

PG 126

Jack looks into his eyes for a moment, then reaches up and PULLS THE
TRIGGER.  *GO TO SLOW MOTION* AS -- KABLAM! his cheeks INFLATE with gas
from the gun.  His eyes bulge, BLOOD flies out backwards from his head.
 SMOKE wafts out of his mouth.

RESUME NORMAL SPEED as Tyler gapes at Jack, then reaches behind his
head and feels -- there's a HOLE BLOWN OUT THE BACK.  Tyler's eyes
glaze over and he falls backwards, plopping on the floor, DEAD, with a
grin on his face.

A throng of Space Monkeys -- two of whom drag Marla -- RUSHES into the
room.  They see Jack, ALONE, holding a gun, bleeding profusely from the
side of his face, where he's SHOT A HOLE through HIS CHEEK.  He stares
at the empty floor in front of him with his weird, little smile.

TALL SPACE MONKEY
ARE YOU ALL RIGHT, SIR?!!

The two Space Monkeys who hold Marla press forward through the crowd. 
One of them puts a GUN to her head.  He COCKS it.

TALL SPACE MONKEY
ARE YOU ALL RIGHT, SIR?!!

Jack takes in the sight of Marla and the gun at her head.  He cracks a
Tyler-esque grin.

JACK
Everything's fine.  Give me the girl.

The Monkeys release Marla.  She moves next to Jack, now becoming more
shocked by his bloody state.  Jack grabs her arm.  She digs through her
purse and pulls out a wad of tissue paper.  She puts them into his
mouth to plug the hole.

MARLA
What the fuck is going on?!

Jack cracks his weird, little smile; his eyes are wide and
half-insane-looking.  He winks at Marla and squeezes her hand.

JACK
Tyler's dead.

The Space Monkeys all grab their duffel bags and file out of the room,
saluting Jack as they go.

Now, Jack and Marla are completely alone.  He struggles to get to his
feet.  She helps him.  They look out the window.

PG 127

MASSIVE EXPLOSION -- a building a quarter of a mile away.  It's
destruction is completely visible from here.  The glass walls RATTLE
LOUDLY from the shock wave.  They both stare out the window.

JACK
Listen, you met me at a really weird time in my life ...

Marla looks at Jack, then looks back out the window.  He reaches for
her hand.  She takes his hand.

They are SILHOUETTED against BRIGHT FLASHES as ANOTHER BUILDING
EXPLODES and COLLAPSES.  ANOTHER BUILDING EXPLODES.  And ANOTHER
BUILDING.  And ANOTHER BUILDING.

The FILM SLOWS DOWN, then ADVANCES ONE FRAME at a TIME -- SHOWING the
SPROCKET HOLES on the SIDES.  It's CAUGHT in the mechanism of the
projector's GATE.  EACH FRAME is the EXPLODING BUILDINGS -- then, *ONE
FRAME is a PENIS*.  Then, EXPLODING BUILDINGS again.  SPEED UP the
frames, LOSE the sprocket holes, RESUME NORMAL SPEED.

FADE OUT

*THE END*

1 INT. MANAGER'S OFFICE- DAY 1
A young man, Cassius Green, is being interviewed for a job at
a telemarketing firm. The interviewer looks over a lengthy
résumé. In his lap, Cassius proudly holds a large plaque with
the words “Employee Of The Month- Cassius Green” engraved on
it.
ANDERSON
Wow. You’ve really gone the extra
mile by lugging that in here.
CASSIUS
Yes, sir. That’s my style.
ANDERSON
Admirable. Your resume is
startlingly impressive as well.
Most people just fill out the
application. You were actually the
manager of the Rusty Scupper
restaurant for 5 years.
CASSIUS
Yes.
ANDERSON
Then, you worked as a teller for
Bank Of America for 2 years, from
‘04 to ‘06, with a 6 month overlap
with the restaurant.
CASSIUS
Mmmhmm.
ANDERSON
Oh! And it says here... you were
employee of the month.
Cassius makes a Vanna White-style hand motion toward his
plaque.
ANDERSON (CONT’D)
What’s that trophy in the bag
there?
Cassius pulls out a tall trophy and places it on the desk.
CASSIUS
Oakland High Moot Court Champion.
I’m a salesman at heart.
ANDERSON
Intriguing... Mainly because I was
bank manager at that particular B
of A from 2003 to 2005. And you,
Mr. Green, never worked there. I
also called the number you gave for
The Rusty Scupper. Was that your
friend Salvador’s number?
Cassius nods.
ANDERSON (CONT’D)
The same Salvador that also applied
here?
Cassius sees Salvador through the window, giving a “thumbs
up”.
CASSIUS
I didn’t know he applied here too.
ANDERSON
It would of been smart if his
outgoing message didn’t say “I’m
Sal, bitches.” So that plaque and
the trophy? Did you steal them?
CASSIUS
I made them. Well, had them made. I
just- I just really need a job.
ANDERSON
Alright, Cassius Green. Listen.
This is telemarketing. We ain’t
fuckin’ mappin’ the human genome or
finding fucking alternative fuel
sources. I don’t care whether you
have work experience. I’ll hire
damn near anybody. That bootleg
plaque proves two things I need to
know- you have initiative and you
can read. You will call as many
contacts as you can during your
shift, and you will read the script
that we give you. And you will show
up to work tomorrow. Happy.
CASSIUS
Thank you, Mr. Anderson.
Cassius stands and tries to shake Anderson’s hand, but is
instead handed a training script, a small pamphlet of papers.
White 5/17/17 2.
ANDERSON
Cassius, one more thing. Stuss.
CASSIUS
(confused)
Stuss?
Without looking at it, Anderson points to a big butcher paper
sign on the wall that reads “S.T.T.S.= Stick To The Script!”,
written in marker.
ANDERSON
Stuss. S.T.T.S., Stick to the
script.
2 INT. CASSIUS’S STUDIO APARTMENT- MORNING 2
Cassius and his girlfriend, Detroit, lay in bed in a very
small studio apartment. On the nightstand there is a faded
sepiatone 1980s photograph of a sharply dressed man posing in
front of a Lincoln Continental. The man has a very proud
expression on his face. Cassius stares at the ceiling while
Detroit lays her head in his chest.
CASSIUS
Hey, Detroit. You ever think about
dying?
DETROIT
Yeah, sometimes.
CASSIUS
I’m not talking about dying right
now, like in an accident or
something. I mean like when we’re
old. Like 90. I think about it all
the time. What will I have done
that’s important, that matters?
DETROIT
I just want to make sure that when
I die I’ll be surrounded by people
who love me and who I love back.
CASSIUS
What about when those people die?
DETROIT
What do you mean?
CASSIUS
At some point we’re gonna die, our
kids and grand kids are gonna die.
(MORE)
White 5/17/17 3.
At some point, no one will even
know you existed. All life will end
on this planet and in billions of
years the sun will explode. Nothing
I’m doing will have mattered.
DETROIT
Baby, it’ll always matter. Because
it matters now. This moment, all of
these moments. When I kiss you,
it’s not for posterity’s sake.
CASSIUS
I mean, you found your calling
though. Your art means something.
But I’m just surviving. Spinning myDETROIT
Ay. Stop. You missed your cue. I
said... When I kiss you, it’s not
for posterity’s sake.
Detroit kisses Cassius and the couple begins to make out.
Soon they are both naked. All of a sudden, the wall abruptly
swings upward- we see, for the first time, that this studio
apartment is really a semi-converted garage, bordering the
sidewalk— leaving the romantic couple exposed to the street
and passersby. Cassius jumps up to close it while pulling his
sweatpants up.
DETROIT (CONT’D)
Fuck, Cassius! I thought you fixed
that!
CASSIUS
My landlord was supposed to.
STREET VOICE (O.S.)
Get a room!
CASSIUS
Muthafucka, I GOT a room!
As Cassius pulls the garage door closed and secures it, his
sweatpants start to fall. Detroit smiles lovingly at this.
Cassius pulls the sweats up and sits back down on the bed.
Detroit gets up and walks toward the bathroom.
DETROIT
I gotta get to work anyway... Don’t
you start work today?
CASSIUS
Yeah.
CASSIUS (CONT'D)
White 5/17/17 4.
Detroit walks off-screen into the bathroom.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
If you want a second job, they said
they hire anybody. You could try
part-time.
Cassius turns on the TV and sits back down. A commercial
starts up.
MAN ON TV (V.O.)
Everyone is talking about the
Worryfree solution! Worryfree is
the revolutionary new business and
lifestyle model taking the world by
storm!
DETROIT (O.S.)
What are they paying you?
Cassius is transfixed on the TV.
MAN ON TV (V.O.)
When you sign a Worryfree contract,
you’re guaranteed employment AND
housing for life! Stop worrying,
get Worryfree! The Worryfree living
quarters are state of the art,
TV shows a chic looking room with 6 bunk beds, like a prison
done up by a hip interior decorator.
MAN ON TV (V.O.
The Worryfree food is to die for,
TV shows a gigantic dining room with thousands of people in
uniforms at long tables with chandeliers hanging overhead.
MAN ON TV (V.O.) (CONT’D)
and Worryfree careers are
fulfilling and satisfying!
DETROIT (O.S.)
Cash baby, what are they paying
you?
CASSIUS
(Still staring at TV)
Uh, I think it’s just commission.
You ever thought about that
Worryfree shit?
DETROIT
Are you crazy?
White 5/17/17 5.
CASSIUS
(staring at TV)
What, for working on commission?
(looking up at Detroit)
Nice earrings.
We see now that DETROIT’S oversize earrings are big, twodimensional, gold metallic block letters. Her right earring
reads MURDER, MURDER, MURDER. Her left one: KILL, KILL, KILL.
3 EXT. CASSIUS’S STUDIO APARTMENT- MORNING 3
CASSIUS exits his apartment through the side door and locks
it. He is spotted by his landlord, SERGIO, who is wearing a
necklace with an oversized gold cross, which has a Jesus with
a frightfully pained face. This particular Jesus seems to be
screaming and writhing in agony.
SERGIO
Ay, Cash! I got overdue housenotes, dude. How much longer do I
have to wait for my money?
CASSIUS
Hey, Serge. I got a job now. I
start today, so I’ll have your
money soon.
SERGIO
Damn, man. It’s 4 months late now.
It’s like “soon” is the only
fuckin’ word I hear from you.
CASSIUS
OK. I’m 4 months late. But you
should be ashamed. This land was
created- by God- for us all, but
greedy asses like you horde it for
yourself and your family and charge
the people for the right to live.
SERGIO
Me and my family? Cassius, I’m your
fucking uncle. Bank might take my
fucking house. Four fucking months.
I gave you the car you’re driving.
CASSIUS
It’s a damn bucket!
SERGIO
Oh yeah? Give it back then! No?
That’s what I thought.
(MORE)
White 5/17/17 6.
That car is better than your shoes.
I need my money in two weeks,
asshole.
4 EXT. GAS STATION- DAY 4
CASSIUS drives his car to the gas station. It’s a red 1982
Honda Civic with a gray primered hood and doors. The car is
very loud—maybe missing a muffler—and has steam coming from
the radiator. CASSIUS walks to the cashier’s window
CASSIUS
(through window)
Gimme forty on two!
Cashier looks down at the forty cents Cassius has left and
looks back at Cassius and the car disapprovingly.
5 EXT. STREET- DAY 5
CASSIUS drives through the city. He passes a group of adult
men playing football. They are wearing Oakland High School
jerseys, but they’re obviously not in high school—some of
them have beards, others have beer guts. CASSIUS honks his
horn rapidly and repeatedly as he passes. They all look. Many
wave.
VARIOUS FOOTBALL PLAYERS
Ay, Cash! What up?!
CASSIUS
(yelling, sing-song)
O-High Play-ers!
CASSIUS gives the clenched-fist-pull acknowledgment and keeps
driving.
He passes a mural-size street-level billboard that shows a
side view of a five-bed bunk beds with people in each bed.
They all look very comfortable. Two of them are sleeping. One
of them is reading a book. Another is laughing while watching
television in his bunk. The one in the middle smiles widely,
looking straight into camera, giving a thumbs-up. Caption:
“WORRYFREE. IF YOU LIVED THERE, YOU’D BE AT WORK ALREADY!”
6 INT. OFFICE BUILDING LOBBY- DAY 6
CASSIUS enters the office building. As he walks toward the
telemarketing offices, he sees a MAN IN A FANCY SUIT use a
key to summon an elevator. The elevator doors are gold, with
hieroglyphics on them—1920s-era faux-Egyptian style.
SERGIO (CONT'D)
White 5/17/17 7.
When the elevator opens we see velvet-upholstered walls and a
chandelier. This is a ridiculously luxurious and gaudy
elevator. There seems to be a purple glow emanating from
inside. The MAN IN A FANCY SUIT smiles at CASSIUS while
entering the elevator. Cassius seems puzzled, but continues
on his way to work.
7 INT. TELEMARKETING CUBICLES- DAY 7
CASSIUS is led into a room where a racially mixed group of
about one hundred people sit at cubicles: Black, East Asian,
South Asian, Latino, and White. Many of the White callers
look “punk.” Leading him: JOHNNY, wearing shirt and tie. His
face is tattooed and he has a Mohawk. They pass two
technicians who are trying to fix a copy machine that
sputters out a few sheets of paper to the floor as they pass.
They pass SALVADOR, who’s on a call but gives CASSIUS a
thumbs up. The walls are covered with multi-colored
electrical wires in a criss-cross fashion.
JOHNNY
This is where the magic happens.
Millions of dollars went into these
walls to make sure that thousands
of calls can go out and in at the
same time without jamming the
lines. Clock in here. Grab a seat.
You studied the script?
CASSIUS
Yeah.
Cassius sits at a cubicle. He sees a wall with several framed
old photos of the same man: one on a phone, another receiving
a phone-shaped trophy, one meeting Ronald Reagan, and one
with him receiving a lap dance. Above the photos: “Hal
Jameson Wall Of Glory”.
Cassius takes out and unfolds a photocopy of the picture from
his nightstand and tacks it to the wall of the cubicle.
JOHNNY
Look. Clock in, don’t be lazy, hit
your contacts, bring in some money
and I won’t have to be an asshole.
Do real good, eventually you might
be able to be a Power Caller.
CASSIUS
What’s a Power Caller?
Johnny points at the ceiling.
White 5/17/17 8.
JOHNNY
Where the callers are ballers.
Where they make the real money.
They have their own elevator.
CASSIUS
Oh yeah, I saw that.
JOHNNY
(walking away)
And stick to the script.
Cassius puts the headset on and clicks the computer keyboard.
A name pops up and we hear it ring.
8 INT. DINING ROOM- DAY 8
We see a man sitting at the dinner table with his family. We
hear the phone ring.
9 INT. TELEMARKETING CUBICLES- DAY 9
Cassius with headset at the desk. The phone is still ringing.
As the phone picks up, Cassius and his desk shake and fall
straight down out of frame. Cassius and his desk land in the
dining room with the man and his family. The man is annoyed.
10 INT. DINING ROOM- DAY 10
MAN EATING DINNER
Yello.
CASSIUS
(Reading script in a very
stiff manner)
Um, Mr. Davidson. Sorry to bother
you, my name is Cassius GrPhone hangs up. Cassius and desk raise up, leaving Cassius
back in the Telemarketing Cubicles.
11 INT. TELEMARKETING CUBICLES- DAY 11
Another name flashes on the screen and we hear it ring. As it
picks up, Cassius and his desk crash into a living room. On
the couch, there is a woman and man, naked, having sex.
White 5/17/17 9.
12 INT. LIVING ROOM- DAY 12
WOMAN ON COUCH
Hello?
CASSIUS
Hi, Mrs. Slater! I’m Cassius Green.
Sorry to botherPhone hangs up Cassius and desk raise up, again leaving
Cassius back in the Telemarketing Cubicles.
13 INT. TELEMARKETING CUBICLES- DAY 13
Cassius stares at the screen, waiting for the next name to
appear. As he waits, behind Cassius- where the technicians
and now Johnny are fixing the copy machine- the copy machine
starts wildly shooting paper everywhere as Johnny and the
technicians frantically try to get a handle on the situation.
Name flashes on screen, it rings. As it picks up, Cassius
crashes down into a darkened kitchen. There is a woman
sitting at the table. She looks very sad.
14 INT. KITCHEN- DAY 14
WOMAN AT TABLE
Hello?
CASSIUS
Hey! Mrs. Costello!
WOMAN AT TABLE
Yes?
15 INT. TELEMARKETING CUBICLES- DAY 15
Cassius looks up at a banner that says “Stick To The Script!”
He then looks at the script which says “1. Introduce
yourself. Be their friend.”
16 INT. KITCHEN- DAY 16
CASSIUS
This is Cassius Green. I’m with
Insight Encyclopedias and I know
you’ve enjoyed our Insight
Birdwatching books, so I just
wanted to help you outWhite 5/17/17 10.
WOMAN ON PHONE
I’m sorry young man, we don’t have
any money. My husband is in the
hospital... he’s 83 with stage 4
cancer and weMrs. Costello continues, starting to sob and then wailing.
17 INT. TELEMARKETING CUBICLES- DAY 17
Cassius looks at the banner18 INT. KITCHEN- DAY 18
-then down at his script. He flips pages frantically through
the pamphlet. “5. Make any problem a selling point. ‘Well,
Mr. Smith, it’s interesting that you say that because...”
CASSIUS
Well, Mrs. Costello. It’s- It’s
interesting that you say that
because book number five in the
Insight series is all about
wellness and how to stay healthy on
your own without even going to the
Doctor.
Phone hangs up, leaving Cassius back in the Telemarketing
Cubicles.
19 INT. TELEMARKETING CUBICLES- DAY 19
Cassius is exasperated. Behind him, the papers are still
shooting into the air from the copy machine- filling the
frame until there is a wall of flying papers behind him.
20 INT. BAR- EVENING 20
Evening. After work. Cassius and Salvador are sitting in a
booth, drinking at a small, ratty bar. They’ve got their
scripts on the table. Cassius is dispirited.
CASSIUS
I feel incompetent and like an
asshole doing this job.
SALVADOR
I don’t feel different than usual.
White 5/17/17 11.
They see a man in a leather jacket talking to a bouncer who
is sitting in front of a door at the back of the bar.
SALVADOR (CONT’D)
Ay! Ain’t that dude from that show?
CASSIUS
Oh, hell yeah! That’s him! That’s
hella cool. I hate that show.
The bouncer opens the door and the man in the leather jacket
goes through it.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
What’s that room? I never noticed
it before.
SALVADOR
That’s the VIP room.
A young couple wearing formal attire talk to the bouncer and
go through the door.
CASSIUS
What the hell is this place doing
with a VIP room?
SALVADOR
Don’t knock it. I used to be in
there all the time. But I’d rather
hang with the common folk.
CASSIUS
What qualifies you to be VIP?
SALVADOR
You need the password. This week
it’s “upscale elegance”... Well,
it’s always “upscale elegance”.
CASSIUS
I’m goin’.
Cassius walks over to the bouncer with his drink, talks to
him, and goes through the door.
21 INT. VIP ROOM- EVENING 21
This is a tiny, ten-by-ten room with leather bench seats
around the perimeter, and a very small tiled dance floor in
the center. At most, four people can fit on the dance floor.
White 5/17/17 12.
The back wall has a little service chute- like a small
dumbwaiter- above the seat. The chute door is closed.
There are neon lights on all the walls and flashing disco
lights on the ceiling.
The music is very loud in the VIP room.
The man in the leather jacket, the couple we saw earlier, a
guy in a track suit, and two other women holding drinks are
seated, bobbing their heads to the music.
Cassius, still holding his drink, squeezes into the empty
seat between the track suit guy and the two women, bobbing
his head as well. It is very crowded.
The service chute opens and a very colorful cocktail with an
umbrella is there with some change.
The man in the leather jacket grabs the drink, dancing and
leaning over Cassius- forcing him to quickly turn to the side
to avoid the man’s inadvertent crotch in his face.
Turning his head makes Cassius look directly at one of the
two women on his side. She subtly laughs at him, and he
reacts by making an overly “cool” and flirty face.
Just then, the track suit guy stretches out by laying his arm
over the top of the bench seat as he talks to the couple.
Cassius is uncomfortable with this, but- instead of saying
anything- leans toward the two women to make some space.
Four more people come in, one sitting and making Cassius
visibly physically uncomfortable. Three of the others dance.
It is crazy crowded in there.
Cassius sips on his drink while still looking at the woman
next to him and trying to look cool, but the ass of an
unidentified dancer bumps his drink- spilling it all over his
face and shirt.
Cassius politely gets up and leaves.
22 INT. BAR- EVENING 22
Cassius walks back to the booth, where Salvador is still
drinking, and sits down, his shirt still wet from the spill.
CASSIUS
That was some player shit.
White 5/17/17 13.
23 INT. TELEMARKETING CUBICLES- DAY 23
CASSIUS comes in to start a new workday, script in hand. He
sits at a cubicle next to an older black man.
LANGSTON
Hey, youngblood.
CASSIUS
Ay, w’sup.
LANGSTON
Lemme give you a tip. Use your
White voice.
CASSIUS
My White voice?
LANGSTON
Yeah.
CASSIUS
But, I don’t have a White voice.
LANGSTON
Come on, youngblood. You know what
I mean. You have a White voice in
there that you can use. Like when
you get pulled over by the police.
CASSIUS
I use my same voice. For real. Like
“Back the fuck up off the car and
nobody gets hurt!”
LANGSTON
Aight. I’m tryna give you some
game. You wanna make money here?
Read the script with a White voice.
CASSIUS
Ok. People say I talk White anyway
though, so why isn’t it working?
LANGSTON
Well, you don’t talk White enough.
I’m not talkin’ bout Will Smith
White- that’s not even White,
that’s just proper. I’m talkin the
real deal.
CASSIUS
(sounding very nasally while
pinching nose) Hello, Mr. Kramer.
(MORE)
White 5/17/17 14.
I’m Cassius Green. Sorry to bother
youLANGSTON
No. You got it wrong. It’s not
about sounding all nasal. It’s
about sounding like you don’t have
a care. Like your bills are paid
and you’re happy about your future
and you’re about to jump in your
Ferrari when you get off this call.
Put some extra breath in there.
Breezy, like you don’t need this
money, like you never been fired,
only laid off. It’s not what all
White people sound like- there
ain’t no real White voice, but it’s
what they wish they sounded like.
It’s what they think they’re
supposed to sound like. Like this,
youngblood.
(overdub by a White actor)
Hey! Mr. Kramer! This is Langston
from Regalview. I didn’t catch you
a bad time did I?
24 INT. MEETING ROOM- DAY 24
We see a crowded meeting room with dry-erase boards on the
walls. All the callers are sitting in folding chairs. Three
managers stand in front of the room. They are Anderson,
Johnny, and a woman named Diana.
JOHNNY
Sales are low. Let’s look at why.
This graph shows the disgusting
lack of contacts reached. You’re
talking too long to these assholes!
If you’re ever gonna be a Power
Caller, you gotta know when to bag
‘em and when to tag ‘em.
Salvador raises his hand.
SALVADOR
Uh, what’s bagging and what’s
tagging?
JOHNNY
Good question. Bagging is when you
drop the call. Like a dead body
into a bag, you know? You drop that
shit cause it crossed the line.
CASSIUS (CONT'D)
(MORE)
White 5/17/17 15.
Tagging is when you claim that
money. It’s a sale. Ch-ching! You
tag it. You claim it, like when
they put the tag on the body at the
morgue to identify it. Or- you
might bag a dead body and be about
to walk away from it and get out of
town to lay low and then, instead,
just drag that heavy fucker on into
the alley and THEN tag it. That’s
when you’re really good.
All of the callers and managers are silent and look confused.
ANDERSON
Johnny- those aren’t authorized
metaphors for this pep rally. Ok!
Diana?
DIANA
Hi, Everyone! I’m new here, so
forgive me if I don’t know all of
your names.
Diana writes her name on the dry-erase board. It reads “Diana
DeBauchery”.
DIANA (CONT’D)
My name is Diana Dee-bo-sher-ree.
SALVADOR
Looks like debauchery to me.
DIANA
It’s not.
(Extremely cheerful)
Anywho! I’m one of your new Team
Leaders! You’re like, “Team
Leader!? I thought she was a
manager! I could’ve sworn they
thought of me as a collection of
motorized appendages!”
Blank stares.
DIANA (CONT’D)
No! You’re not employees anymore,
you’re Team Members! Almost family.
CASSIUS
Do we get paid more?
Diana smiles while shaking head “no”.
JOHNNY (CONT'D)
White 5/17/17 16.
ANDERSON
All right, Team Members, that’s all
for today. Let’s get back to work.
JOHNNY
Remember! Hit your contacts! Up the
ante! Work the grid! And?!
Johnny points to an S.T.T.S sign.
EVERYONE AT MEETING
Stick to the script.
JOHNNY
That’s right. Any one of you can
turn Power Caller and be rollin’ in
dough!
25 INT. TELEMARKETING CUBICLES- DAY 25
SQUEEZE- a handsome guy, a few years older than Cassius,
confidently approaches Cassius as he walks to his desk.
SQUEEZE
Ay, man. Seen you around for a
couple weeks. I’m Squeeze. Good
question in there.
CASSIUS
I’m Cassius. Call me Cash.
SQUEEZE
Good question in there.
CASSIUS
Oh. About getting paid? I was just
wondering why we’re supposed to be
hyped about this bullshit.
SQUEEZE
Yeah, right? Well, you cut to the
chase man.
(very quietly, secretive)
A player needs to mob up with us
for some scrill and bennies.
Cassius doesn’t get it.
SQUEEZE (CONT’D)
A bunch of us are organizing to
make them pay us more and get some
benefits. We could use some energy
like yours to jump this offWhite 5/17/17 17.
CASSIUS
Well, I’m real busy with mySqueeze sees Johnny looking at him suspiciously.
SQUEEZE
We can’t talk now. Let’s have a
drink later. On me.
26 EXT. STREET CORNER- EVENING 26
Detroit twirls a big, arrow shaped sign that says “Off!” She
drops the sign as it twirls, hitting pedestrians and cars
with the sign. Cassius’s car, loud and backfiring, pulls up
and honks. She gets in, sticking her hand out the window to
hold the sign outside the car. It’s too big to fit. Also in
the car are Salvador and Squeeze. Cassius and Detroit greet
each other with a kiss.
CASSIUS
Off?
DETROIT
As in “20% Off”.
(smiles)
As in “My man didn’t get me off
this morning”.
CASSIUS
Stupid.
DETROIT
W’sup, Sal.
(nodding toward Squeeze)
Who’s this?
CASSIUS
Detroit, meet Squeeze. We all work
at Regalview together.
SQUEEZE
Detroit?
DETROIT
My parents wanted me to have an
American name.
SQUEEZE
Nice!
CASSIUS
Detroit is a brilliant visual and
performance artistWhite 5/17/17 18.
DETROIT
And no, my art is not twirling
signsCASSIUS
-who’s about to open her first
gallery show.
SQUEEZE
Yeah?
DETROIT
Ok, Mr. Embarrassing Intro. Cassius
is my brilliant manCASSIUS
Not brilliant. I don’t really do
anything.
DETROIT
That’s silly. Squeeze- in high
school Cash wasCar and passengers jerk forward repeatedly, then normalize.
CASSIUS
Stuck brake... You always mention
what I did in high school, but look
at our high school football team.
No, literally. Look at them.
Cassius points out the window. We see the football team from
earlier, scrimmaging in a park.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
They were stars in high school, now
all they do is work at home depot
and play football everyday. Just
stuck.
SALVADOR
What’s wrong with that? They enjoy
it. They’re friends.
DETROIT
Baby, can we please not talk about
the sun exploding tonight?
Detroit turns up the car radio. They pass the WorryFree
billboard from earlier, the one with the bunk bed and the guy
giving a thumbs-up. It’s been altered with spray paint,
stencil, and wheat-pasted paper. The people in beds are now
wrapped in chains. There’s a yellow caution sign. The caption
now reads: “WORRY. SLAVERY AT WORK.” It’s signed “LEFT EYE”.
White 5/17/17 19.
CASSIUS
That’s not me. I’mma do something.
SALVADOR
Man, you’re a telemarketer now,
like me. That’s something.
It starts to rain as they drive.
CASSIUS
D, wiper duty, please.
DETROIT picks up two strings- tied separately to each wiper—
and starts to pull rhythmically left and right, manually
making the wipers work.
SALVADOR
I never get wiper duty!
DETROIT
You can wipe my ass, Sal.
SALVADOR
With my tongue?
CASSIUS
Might make your breath smell
better.
Cassius and Detroit laugh while singing “Shitty Breath Sal”.
Car putters, backfires, and goes dead. White smoke wafts out
from under the hood.
SALVADOR
This is a damn bucket!
27 EXT. BAR- NIGHT 27
Whole gang is pushing the car while Detroit steers. It’s
still smoking. The car stops in front of a bar. Next to the
bar, on the street, are three RVs and a van with laundry
hanging lines between the vehicles. People live in these.
28 INT. BAR- NIGHT 28
The TV in the bar shows a newscast reporting a violent
protest with tear gas, protesters scaling fences, police
crouching in the street for cover. Many protesters wear a
single black grease paint stripe under their left eye.
White 5/17/17 20.
REPORTER (V.O.)
...the fourth day of violent
protests at Worryfree headquarters.
Protesters say Worryfree’s method
of lifetime labor contracts is a
new form of slavery. Worryfree CEO
Steve Lift was interviewed on Oprah
today.
Newscast cuts to Steve Lift and Oprah, sitting in Steve
Lift’s living room.
STEVE LIFT
Our workforce doesn’t sign
contracts under threat of physical
violence. The comparison to slavery
is offensive. We’re transforming
life itself for the better. We’re
saving the economy. Saving lives.
Newscast cuts back to protest scene.
PROTESTER
(to reporter)
There is no employment for many
people. Even sweatshops have been
replaced by Worryfree LiveWork
centers. These are prisons. People
are packed in like sardines, fed
cheap slop, and worked to the bone
fourteen hours a day.
REPORTER (V.O.)
Many of the violent protesters are
part of the “Left Eye Faction” and
are identifiable by the black mark
under their left eye.
The bartender changes the channel.
On the TV screen, we see a game show with large chyron that
reads “I Got The S#*@ Kicked Outta Me!”, with the game show
audience screaming the words out loud.
GAME SHOW AUDIENCE
I got the [beep] kicked outta me!
We see a montage of contestants getting beaten with paddles,
swimming in a trough of greenish-brown sludge, being pelted
with baseballs via a pitching machine- all with laugh tracks
playing. Contestants seem to be afraid or in a lot of pain.
White 5/17/17 21.
BARTENDER
Alright, folks! It’s Tuesday
Boozeday! Half off all drinks!
Whoops and whistles throughout the bar. Cassius, Detroit,
Squeeze, Salvador are in a booth. Detroit’s friend Samiyah
has joined them.
SALVADOR
I’m just sayin’, if you don’t cook
the spaghetti in the sauce with the
cheese in it first- that’s some
White shit.
CASSIUS
That’s some bullshit. How you gon’
say what’s Black and what’s White?
SALVADOR
Well, that’s how Black folks do it.
CASSIUS
You’re wrong. I’m BlackSALVADOR
You’re kind of BlackCASSIUS
I’m BLACK. I cook my spaghetti, I
add the sauce, then I sprinkle some
Parmesan cheese. Fuck it. Spaghetti
is White anyway. It’s from Italy.
SALVADOR
Hell no! Italians ain’t White!
CASSIUS AND DETROIT
Yes they are!
SALVADOR
Since when!?
SQUEEZE
Since about the last 60 years.
DETROIT
Spaghetti is Chinese.
CASSIUS
Speaking of White, I’d like to make
a toast.
Everyone raises their glasses. Cassius clears his throat.
White 5/17/17 22.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
To my esteemed Regalview associates
whom I revere with great fervor,
and to my alluring and phenomenally
talented fiancée, I’d like to
dedicate this imbibing of
intoxicating elixirs. Here’s to
becoming a Power Caller!
SALVADOR
What the fuck? That's crazy!
SAMIYAH
Oh, shit!
SQUEEZE
Damn!
DETROIT
How the hell did you do that?
CASSIUS
Older dude at the jobby-job showed
me. It’s the White voice. I guess
I’m a natural at it.
SALVADOR
That’s some freaky supernatural
shit man. Voodoo. Sounds like
you’re overdubbed.
CASSIUS shrugs.
SQUEEZE
A magic White voice. That’s fucking
scary. Never seen that before. But
I have seen that Power Caller shit.
It’s a scam.
CASSIUS
Oh yeah?
SQUEEZE
“If you work hard enough as the fry
cook, one day you could be the
manager! If you twirl that little
sign well enough, one day you could
twirl a bigger sign at a more
glamorous corner!”
DETROIT
I already have the best corner. And
the biggest sign. And the best
word. Off. It’s the anchor to the
slogan.
White 5/17/17 23.
CASSIUS
So you don’t like ambition. You
want me to settle for a life where
all I do is work, fuck, and sleep.
SQUEEZE
Naw. That’s what they want.
SALVADOR
I heard Power Callers get to sit on
silk couches and get blowjobs while
they make their calls.
DETROIT
What about the female Power
Callers?
SQUEEZE
Look. Even if you become a Power
Caller- you ain’t gettin much
anyway. And all the rest of us get
is shat on.
Squeeze pulls out flyers and passes them to the table.
SQUEEZE (CONT’D)
We need a union at Regalview. We
gotta look out for each other. Fuck
them. That way, we all get paid.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Ok. Ok. Well said, brougham. I’m
down.
(in his own voice)
Now we all need another half-priced
drink!
29 EXT. CASSIUS’S STUDIO APARTMENT- DAY 29
Detroit and Cassius are rushing out the door. Sergio is
there. He looks sullen.
SERGIO
Hey, CassiusCASSIUS
I get paid Friday. I’ll have half
the money for you then.
SERGIO
Even if you have all the money,
that little four months rent ain’t
gonna help me. I owe too much.
(MORE)
White 5/17/17 24.
I got word- if I don’t have a
boatload of money by next monthwhich I won’t, the bank is taking
this shit. You should look for a
new place.
CASSIUS
Damn.
SERGIO
Making my diabetes act up.
Sergio pulls at the feet of the Jesus figure on his gold
cross, which is on his necklace. A pill pops out of the
bottom of the cross into Sergio’s hand. We realize that the
cross is also a pez-like pill dispenser.
CASSIUS
What are you gonna do?
Sergio pops the pill into his mouth and swallows it.
SERGIO
I’ve been talkin’ to them WorryFree
people. They sent me the brochure.
It don’t sound that bad. Three hots
and a cot, like we used to say.
CASSIUS
Naw, Serge. Don’t do that. We can
figure somethin’ out.
30 INT. TELEMARKETING CUBICLES- DAY 30
Cassius sits in front of the computer with his headset on.
Langston is seated in the cubicle across from him. Salvador
is at a cubicle next to him. Johnny is watching from a few
cubicles over and listening in to Cassius’s call.
31 INT. TACKY BACHELOR PAD- DAY 31
Cassius’s desk is in the bachelor pad. He talks to caller.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
... look, you bring a chick to your
apartment. It’s clean. It’s
stylish. She’s seen that before
from the asshole she went home with
last week.
SERGIO (CONT'D)
(MORE)
White 5/17/17 25.
She glances over and sees those
brown leather bad boys from the
Insight Encyclopedias Intellectual
Edition- and she drops panties.
32 INT. TELEMARKETING CUBICLES- DAY 32
Johnny is hyped. Mimics pulling a choo-choo horn. Humps air.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
You know what I mean? It’s fucktime. Oh, yeah? Ha. Spin Doctors.
Classic! Tim- I want to chop it up
more, but I gotta get to my squash
game... was that Visa or
Mastercard?
Cassius types as he glances over at the photocopied picture.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
(CONT’D)
Thanks, dude! I‘m out. Again, don’t
do anything I wouldn’t do better!
(to Langston- in own
voice)
Ay, man! This voice thing is
workin’!
Johnny walks over to Cassius. Cassius stands up gives him a
high five!
33 INT. TELEMARKETING CUBICLES- DAY 33
Montage of Cassius making sales and Johnny congratulating him
with various high fives, over mutltiple days, as other
callers look on.
34 INT. TELEMARKETING CUBICLES- DAY 34
JOHNNY
Yeah! You’re stoked, man! You are
doing so fucking good right now
with the voice thing, but hit more
contacts per hour. You make less
per call, but more by end of day.
CASSIUS
Ok.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
White 5/17/17 26.
JOHNNY
Oh, and they’ve been talkin’ about
you bro. You are on your way.
Johnny points up toward the ceiling.
CASSIUS
(very quietly)
To heaven?
JOHNNY
Almost. PC, baby. Power Caller.
Cassius smiles and turns back toward the computer to call.
SALVADOR
Told me the same thing 3 months agoNice earrings!
Cassius moves to reveal that the earrings are on Detroit- now
working at Regalview- behind Cassius. They are bejeweled
erect penises with bejeweled testicles.
DETROIT
Thank you. I made them myself.
35 INT. BAR- NIGHT 35
A party’s going on at the bar. A lot of telemarketers are
there. A DJ’s playing music and people dancing. The TV is
silently playing “I Got The S#*@ Kicked Outta Me!”. Cassius
sits at the bar with Langston as Squeeze walks up.
CASSIUS
(to bartender)
Long Island Ice Tea, neat.
SQUEEZE
(motioning toward screen)
What kind of world is it when this
show is the most popular show in
America? They say 150 million
people watch this every night.
LANGSTON
I, personally, love to see a
muthafucka get beat down and
humiliated. Makes me feel all warm
inside. I got the T-shirt.
Langston points to his “I Got The S#*@ Kicked Outta Me!” Tshirt.
White 5/17/17 27.
SQUEEZE
I’m gonna go dance, man.
CASSIUS
Fa sho.
Cassius looks down at what Squeeze has set down on the stool.
A jacket and a newspaper. The newspaper headline reads
“Senate Committee Clears Worryfree Of ‘Slavery’ Charges”.
Langston signals the bartender for another drink. The
bartender reaches for one of two identical oversized bottles
of Jack Daniels Whiskey.
LANGSTON
Nuh uh, man. I want the good shit.
The bartender reaches for the other of the two identical Jack
Daniels bottles. Leaving it on the shelf, he opens the facade
of the bottle- as if it were a door. It’s actually a bottleshaped compartment holding a much smaller bottle. The inner
walls of the compartment are wood-grained. There’s a light
illuminating the smaller bottle. Bartender grabs smaller
bottle. pours a neat glass for Langston. Cassius watches.
CASSIUS
You ain’t dancin’, man?
LANGSTON
Hell naw. I’m too old for that
shit. Whatever happened to just
doin’ The Dog? What happened to
Freakin’? Now you gotta dislocate
your muthafuckin’ shoulder and do
gymnastics just to get down. Fuck I
look like?
CASSIUS
You off, dude. Ay. Power Callersthey make shitloads of money. Benz
and big-ass house payment money.
How the fuck is that possible?
LANGSTON
If you sellin’ the bullshit we’re
sellin’, it’s impossible. But
they’re not sellin’ the bullshit
we’re sellin’.
CASSIUS
Yeah, I guess comparing our job to
theirs is like apples and oranges.
White 5/17/17 28.
LANGSTON
More like apples and the holocaust.
36 EXT. BAR- NIGHT 36
SALVADOR, SQUEEZE, and the football players from earlier are
outside standing in a circle smoking weed and talking
excitedly. Cassius approaches the group. We hear whoops and
hollers as people watch cars doing doughnuts in the street.
SALVADOR
Cash! I was telling everybody how
you been puttin the smack down at
work.
CASSIUS
Yeah, man. I never been good at
anything before. I’m feeling
myself. I’m a monster at this shit.
DETROIT walks up to CASSIUS by surprise and hugs him.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
Hey, Baby!
DETROIT
Hey, Lovely. I was hoping to see
you earlier. Thought you’d pop up.
CASSIUS
At the gallery? You said don’t comeall your friends were helping.
DETROIT
Yeah, baby. I said that. But don’t
listen to what I say, listen to
what I want.
SQUEEZE
Hey, Detroit. Nice earrings.
Detroit has changed earrings. They are now gold metallic
figurines of a hooded man strapped to an electric chair.
CASSIUS
You changed earrings?
The camera focus changes away from one of Detroit’s earrings
to reveal a large billboard across the street behind her,
just above a wall of white smoke from the cars burning rubber
on the street. The billboard shows a picture of a Black man
sitting on a couch with a remote control.
White 5/17/17 29.
He is in exactly the same position as the figurine of the
hooded man in the electric chair. Caption under the picture,
big block letters: “Show the world that you are a RESPONSIBLE
Babydaddy. Sign your family up for WorryFree- NOW!” The white
burnt rubber smoke rises, fills the frame, covers the
billboard.
37 EXT. STREET- MORNING 37
The smoke clears. It is morning and the billboard from the
night before has been altered by street artists. The man on
the couch is now a a Huey-Newton-like figure, holding guns
and wearing a black beret. The caption has been altered using
spray paint and flat white paint. It reads: “Show the world
your RESPONSE, baby. Freedom NOW!” It’s signed, “Left Eye”.
Camera pans down the street to see Cassius’s car puttering
toward us. Detroit, in the passenger seat, looks up at the
billboard and smiles.
As they drive, many people are living in their cars, vans and
RVs. A man in an inexpensive suit brushes his teeth in a car,
which he is obviously living in. Some houses have WorryFree
moving containers in front, reading “THIS FAMILY CHOSE
WORRYFREE”. A book store window: filled with Steve Lift’s
book “I’m On Top”. The cover: Steve Lift sitting on a horse.
38 EXT. SIDE OF OFFICE BUILDING- MORNING 38
30 people are gathered outside around the corner from the
Regalview entrance, listening to Squeeze who is in the center
of the crowd speaking loudly. It’s a mini-rally. Cassius and
Detroit walk up and work their way into the center. Against
the building, there are 4 makeshift three-foot tall shelters.
SQUEEZE
...today is gonna be the warning
shot- telling them we stand united.
A 20 minute work stoppage during
prime calling time. I’ll give the
call. Sal, what’s the call?
SALVADOR
Phones down!
SQUEEZE
Phones down. Then we all hang up,
put down our headsets, turn off the
computers. They’re gonna single
some of us out. Threaten our jobs.
White 5/17/17 30.
LANGSTON
Fuck that.
SQUEEZE
Yes. Fuck that. We ride for anybody
they try to fire. We fight because
we create the profits and they
don’t share.
Detroit watches Squeeze, intrigued. Cassius watches Detroit.
SQUEEZE (CONT’D)
If we’re gonna give them our day,
they need to give us enough to
cover necessities. Human decency.
Is anybody not down? Speak now.
DETROIT
Fuck all that, Squeeze! We ready to
roll on these muthafuckas!
SALVADOR
Hell yeah.
Sal and Detroit look at Cassius, who’s hesitating.
CASSIUS
Let’s do this. One for all, all for
one.
SALVADOR
Like the 300 Musketeers.
SQUEEZE
Alright, folks. Be ready at 3pm.
The crowd walks toward the entrance, with Cassius trailing
near the back and Detroit lost in the crowd talking to
Squeeze and Salvador.
39 INT. OFFICE BUILDING LOBBY- DAY 39
As he walks in the building, he sees a couple men in fancy
suits going into the same luxurious elevator from earlier.
They are accompanied by a couple of stereotypical white
female fashion model types. They are all happily chatting to
one another. One of the men turns toward Cassius and
cheerfully winks.
FANCY SUIT GUY
Don’t hurt yourself now.
White 5/17/17 31.
Cassius stares for a second as the elevator doors close, then
keeps walking.
40 INT. TELEMARKETING CUBICLES- DAY 40
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Thanks, Mr. Goldberg. As always,
we’ll be getting that out to you
right away. By theSqueeze stands up and all of the callers go silent.
SQUEEZE
Regalview management, you are
hereby warned! We will not be
overlooked!
MR. GOLDBERG (O.S.)
Hello... Hello?
Squeeze takes off his headset as Johnny, and Diana watch.
Anderson looks up from his book, “Steve Lift: I’m On Top”.
SQUEEZE
Phones down!
All of the callers take off their headsets.
During the commotion, Cassius looks at Detroit and they smile
at each other. Then he looks at the photocopied picture. The
man in the picture has a raised fist. Cassius smiles. He
looks back and the photo is back to normal.
Johnny, Anderson, and Diana are pissed.
41 INT. MANAGER'S OFFICE- DAY 41
Anderson, Diana, and Johnny are sitting in the office while
Cassius stands.
CASSIUS
I know you’re gonna threaten to
fire me. Whatever. If you do, weJohnny, Diana and Anderson laugh.
JOHNNY
Pack your shit up and get out.
CASSIUS
Fuck you, Johnny. Fuck you, too.
Once everybody finds outWhite 5/17/17 32.
Johnny, Diana and Anderson laugh.
ANDERSON
(Laughing)
What? No, No, No, Mr. Green! You
sound a little paranoid! We are the
bearers of good news. Great newsJOHNNY
Great motherfucking news.
ANDERSON
Yes. Great motherfucking news,
Power Caller.
CASSIUS
WaitANDERSON
Got the call just now. They think
you’re Class A material. You’re
going upstairs, my compadre. You’ve
been promoted. 9am. Tomorrow
morning. You have a suit?
DIANA
Of course he does. Strong,
powerful, young Power Caller like
him.
CASSIUS
Yeah, but theyCassius looks toward the cubicles. Squeeze and Sal are doing
secretive clenched fist salutes, as if to comfort him.
ANDERSON
They’re doing what they’re gonna
do. You wont be going against their
actions. Their issue’s down here,
not up there. Two very different
kinds of telemarketing jobs.
Cassius looks toward cubicles again. Johnny draws the blinds.
Anderson is flanked by the football team running in place.
ANDERSON (CONT’D)
It’s your moment. Don’t waste it.
Cassius blinks. The football team is gone.
CASSIUS
You’re right, I guess. Yeah. Ok.
White 5/17/17 33.
JOHNNY
The big money. The top fucking tier
of telemarketing. Making history
with legends like Hal Jameson. Bad
ass.
We hear a POP and see that Diana has popped a bottle of
Champagne.
42 INT. OFFICE BUILDING LOBBY- MORNING 42
Cassius walks through the Regalview doors wearing a very,
very fancy bright green suit with a pink tie and briefcase.
He walks toward the closed elevator doors, in front of which
Diana Debauchery is waiting.
DIANA
Oh. My. You are ready, aren’t you?
CASSIUS
Hey, Ms. D. Yeah, IDIANA
(gesturing towards suit)
Mr. Green, I presume?
CASSIUS
I didn’t think about that.
DIANA
Well, let’s do this, muthafuckah.
Diana inserts the key and turns it to summon the elevator.
DIANA (CONT’D)
I always wanted to say that. Let’s
do this, my little gigolo. Do
gigolos really get lonely too?
CASSIUS
I don’t get it, Ms. D.
DIANA
Oh, you can get it.
The Elevator door opens and they both walk in. The elevator
has velvet and leather covered walls with a chandelier
hanging. Macabre harp music is playing. The doors close and
Diana starts to enter a long code into a keypad.
White 5/17/17 34.
43 INT. FANCY ELEVATOR- DAY 43
Elevator goes up and we hear a woman’s voice spoken in a
calm, breathy tone on the elevator’s loudspeaker while the
music continues.
ELEVATOR VOICE
Welcome, Power Caller. Today is
your day to dominate the world. You
are Regalview’s elite brigade. Take
your place alongside legends like
Hal Jameson. You call the shots.
CASSIUS
(to Diana)
StrangeELEVATOR VOICE
You are in your sexual prime. The
top of the reproductive pile.
CASSIUS
What is this crazy shit? Does it
really say this everytimeThe elevator door has opened. There are two men standing on
the other side of the door. One of them is FANCY SUIT GUY.
They have been waiting for Cassius.
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Welcome to the Power Calling Suite,
Mr. Green. Please use your White
Voice at all times here.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Oh. I’m sorry. I totally didn’t
realize.
44 INT. POWER CALLING SUITE- DAY 44
FANCY SUIT GUY’s assistant motions and they follow him
through a decadent, plush space. There are silk couches,
velvet-covered walls, color-coordinated computers, and large
flat-screen TVs showing breaking-news clips. A Power Caller
is getting a manicure as he conducts a sales pitch.
Everything seems brighter here than in the rest of the
world—similar to Dorothy’s entry into Oz. FANCY SUIT GUY
talks as they walk.
White 5/17/17 35.
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Mr. Green, you’ve been selected
because you have the potential to
be a great telemarketer. Do you
know what we sell up here?
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Well, I heardFANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
We sell power. Fire power. Man
power. When U.S. weapons
manufacturers sell arms to other
countries, who do you think makes
that call at the precisely perfect
time which is during dinner? We do.
Before a drone drops a bomb on an
apartment building in Pakistan, who
drops the bomb-ass sales pitch over
the phone? We do.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Firepower. And Manpower?
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
WorryFree- they’re our biggest
client. We help thousands of
companies utilize WorryFree workers
to improve their efficiency.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
You sell their slave labor. To
other companies? Over the phone?
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
We’ve got a sharp one here.
45 INT. BUS DEPOT- DAY 45
A man with a thick mustache, large sunglasses, and a hat has
mechanic’s coveralls on walking through a bus depot. He is
carrying a messenger bag. He walks along side a bus, checking
that the coast is clear. He stops on the side of the bus,
pulls out a cardboard stencil reading “SLAVES” and sprays red
paint over it onto the bus’s WorryFree ad. On another bus he
sprays a monacle, top hat, and goatee on a Steve Lift book
ad. Another man in mechanic’s coveralls walks up behind him.
SECOND MECHANIC
What the fuck are you doing?
The spray painting man bolts off, running for the door.
White 5/17/17 36.
SECOND MECHANIC (CONT’D)
Dave, stop him!
Dave, the security guard, is not near the door but runs after
the spray painter and tries to get a hold on him, but doesn’t
make contact as the agile spray painter is too quick for him.
He runs away- winded security guard no longer chasing. His
sunglasses come off, revealing a black grease-paint stripe
under his left eye. He pulls off the mustache. It’s Detroit.
DETROIT
Left Eye, bitches!
46 INT. POWER CALLING SUITE- DAY 46
Cassius, Fancy Suit Guy, and Fancy Suit Guy’s Assistant are
now standing in front of a flat screen showing a Worryfree
documentary which illustrates what Fancy Suit Guy describes.
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Worryfree is has resuscitated
America. Workers live in space
efficient dwellings in the same
facilities where production occurs.
They make anything and everything.
Lifetime contracts. No wages
needed. They make cars for what it
used to cost to make bicycles.
CASSIUS
I don’t know if I canFANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
White voice.
CASSIUS
I don’t know if I canFANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Here’s the starting salary.
Fancy Suit Guy’s Assistant points to his notepad and shows
Cassius. Cassius thinks for a moment.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
It looks like I’m gonna have to buy
some more suits. Is there a script?
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
More sophisticated. You’ll be
studying here until late.
(MORE)
White 5/17/17 37.
We need you in the mix, pronto.
We’ve got a lot to teach you,
Cassius Green.
47 EXT. STREET CORNER- DAY 47
Detroit stands alone at dusk on a street corner, twirling a
sign in the shape of an arrow that reads “Signs”. She stops
twirling the sign intermittently to point it towards the
store she is standing next to which has a big lit up sign on
it that also reads “Signs”. Apparently, they’re selling
signs. Detroit is looking down the street hoping that Cassius
will show soon. She is wearing gold mettallic block letter
earrings that, on her right side, read “Bury The Rag” and on
her left side read “Deep In Your Face”.
A car pulls up. It’s Squeeze. He rolls down the window and
yells out.
SQUEEZE
Ay, baby! What’s your sign!?
DETROIT
(looks and laughs)
Pffft!
Squeeze gets out and walks toward Detroit, who’s smiling and
continues to twirl the sign.
DETROIT (CONT’D)
That was fucking crazy yesterday!
Like a scene out of Norma Rae.
SQUEEZE
Regalview’s scared shitless. We’ll
win.
(referring to the sign)
Can I check that out?
Detroit shrugs and hands him the sign. Squeeze starts
twirling the sign in the air, around his back, doing some
amazing dance moves while he is doing it. Detroit slyly
checks him out. The display of talent makes her smile from
ear to ear. A car honks.
DETROIT
Bravo! Where’d you learn that?
SQUEEZE
Down in L.A. We organized the first
sign twirlers union there.
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE
White 5/17/17 38.
DETROIT
That’s what you do? Go from place
to place, stirring up trouble?
As they talk, the sign is continually spun between them.
SQUEEZE
The trouble’s already there. I help
folks fix it.
DETROIT
Shit-fixer Local 123. I try to do
the same with my art. Expose the
bullshit.
SQUEEZE
Not really the sameDETROIT
It’s pretty much the same.
SQUEEZE
I haven’t seen your stuffDETROIT
I’m not gonna show you my stuff.
SQUEEZE
But art’s just a complaint. People
have complained for centuries.
DETROIT
We’re travelling to freedom and
travellers need maps. That’s my
art. Really good, aesthetically
pleasing, hopefully expensive,
maps. But, I do other things, too.
Squeeze does a behind-the back move with the sign. He throws
it in the air, spins around, claps three times, catches it.
SQUEEZE
So, how does this work with you and
Cassius? You sound like a radical
and he’s- I don’t knowDETROIT
He’s real. He’s not that fake-ass
bourgie gallery world. He’s been
through so much hard shit in life
that he grounds me- and my art.
SQUEEZE
Well you’re rubbing him off right.
White 5/17/17 39.
Detroit looks confused.
SQUEEZE (CONT’D)
You know what I mean- he helped
with the work stoppage. Your fire
is rubbing off. I like it. Your
fire, I mean. I’m going. You look
done here. Need a ride?
DETROIT
Nope. Cash is on his way. Thanks,
though.
Squeeze reaches and wipes something from under Detroit’s eye.
It’s faint residue of black grease paint. Squeeze and Detroit
look at the grease paint which is now on Squeeze’s thumb.
Detroit realizes that her cover is blown.
SQUEEZE
Nice work.
Squeeze drives off. Detroit looks down the street for
Cassius’s car. later, the sign store’s sign turns off.
Detroit sits against the wall, looking and checking her
phone.
48 EXT. STREET CORNER- DUSK 48
She sees a bus and runs to get on with her sign. Bus has an
ad on it: “Why Sleep On The Street? We Got You. WorryFree.”
49 INT. POWER CALLING SUITE- DUSK INTO NIGHT 49
Montage of Cassius reading textbooks, watching video
presentations on large flat-screen TVs, taking a seminar with
while taking notes. Cassius looks at the time and rushes out.
50 EXT. GALLERY- NIGHT 50
Cassius’s car pulls up to the gallery where Detroit is
working on her art.
51 INT. GALLERY- NIGHT 51
Cassius runs into the gallery.
DETROIT
Baby! Are you okay?
White 5/17/17 40.
CASSIUS
Sorry, IDETROIT
Did you get in an accident?
CASSIUS
NoDETROIT
How about robbed? Or something else
extra crazy- so I don’t think you
faked and left me on the corner for
an hour.
CASSIUS
I didn’t tell you before cause I
wasn’t sure about it, but, as of
today- I’m a Power Caller. I had to
stay late. We’ll be selling crazyDETROIT
So, you can pay me back my $80?
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Hell yes, baby. No problem!
DETROIT
Stop that. It’s freaky. What do
they sellCASSIUS
Do I finally get to see your show?
We see that this is a gallery with 30-foot ceilings. There
are 20 colorful 20-foot sculptures of Africa made with wood,
metal, and found objects. Some are mounted, some are
unfinished on the floor. There are slogans and items with
references to music, literature, and political movements
intertwined in the sculpture. There are also life-sized
statues of people standing on the floor, looking at the
Africas as if they were art connoiseurs. Cassius and Detroit
walk and look at the pieces. Detroit lights up a joint.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
Wow. They’re beautiful. And big.
DETROIT
Africa.
CASSIUS
Oh. Really? Is that what that is?
White 5/17/17 41.
DETROIT
I mean they’re big because they’re
Africa. Then I just added my
statues from last year.
CASSIUS
Well, if nobody comes, it’ll look
full. Can I ask a question?
DETROIT
You just didCASSIUS
Why did you choose Africa for this?
As Detroit answers, she accents her statements with grand
hand gestures between tokes on the joint. Cassius mistakes
these gestures as Detroit passing the joint to him. He tries
to grab it, each time missing until he finally gives up.
DETROIT
That’s where humanity started. I
wanted to talk about life shaped by
exploitation and fighting for a say
in our own lives...
Cassius zones out and is focusing on the joint in Detroit’s
hand. He nods. He can see her lips moving but isn’t hearing
her. Her audio fades in and out as Cassius’s attention does.
DETROIT (CONT’D)
...how beauty, love and laughter is
able to thrive and flourish under
almost any circumstances...
Cassius is still looking at the joint and not hearing her.
DETROIT (CONT’D)
...how Capitalism started by
stealing labor from Africans and
how you’re nodding as if you’re
listening, but you’re not.
Cassius nods, pretending to listen.
CASSIUS
Mmmhmm. Oh. Oh! No. No, I was
taking it all in. I’m just tired.
It’s hard to focus. Bear with me.
DETROIT
Ok.
Cassius takes a hit of the joint.
White 5/17/17 42.
CASSIUS
I’m listening now. Tell me about
it. So, um, capitalism?
DETROIT
I’m done talking right now. I want
to marinate in this. It’s major for
me. What I want now is for us to
sit down, hit the weed, and just be
here.
Cassius and Detroit sit down on a futon in the middle of the
gallery. Detroit lays her head on Cassius’s chest. With one
hand around Detroit, Cassius puffs the joint.
CASSIUS
Baby, the statues are fuckin’ with
me. Statues freak me out. Like they
might come to life.
DETROIT
Mmmhmm. Shhhh.
52 EXT. SIDE OF OFFICE BUILDING- MORNING 52
A colorful sign on a wall reads: “Regalview Team Members!
Remember that the team comes first! Don’t let outsiders
interfere with the team!”
The sign is snatched down by an unknown hand as we pull out
to reveal about 15 callers gathered in a circle with Squeeze
and Salvador addressing them. Cassius is walking toward the
circle in a silver zoot suit, carrying a briefcase. He
notices them and starts to cross the street to go around, but
is spotted by Salvador.
SALVADOR
Ay! Where you been, man? What’s
with the suit?
CASSIUS
I got promotedSQUEEZE
What? What does that mean? Are you
a manager now?
CASSIUS
Naw, man. I’m a Power Caller now.
About to be paid.
White 5/17/17 43.
SQUEEZE
Oh. That’s interesting. We’re all
trying to get fucking paid. But we
had a plan to do it as a team. You
on the team?
CASSIUS
Yeah, I guess. But I’m on the
bench. The bench where you sit and
get your bills paid. You know my
uncle is about to lose his house.
SALVADOR
The definition of a sell-out.
You’re a walking cliche.
CASSIUS
I’m not selling y’all out. My
success is not affecting y’all.
Keep doing what you doing and I’ll
root from the sidelines- and try
not to laugh at that stupid ass
smirk on your face.
Salvador puffs his chest up and his face comes in very close
to Cassius’s face. Cassius already has his chest puffed up.
They both have scowls on their faces. The crowd quickly
gathers around them.
LANGSTON
Ay, we don’t need thisCassius and Salvador stay in their stances, tempers flaring.
CASSIUS
You doin’ alright?
SALVADOR
Oh- I’m doing great. How are YOU
doin’?
CASSIUS
I’m havin’ a lovely time. You have
a good day.
SALVADOR
You have a better week!
CASSIUS
I will! And may you find this month
fulfilling and gratifying!
White 5/17/17 44.
SALVADOR
I hope your whole year is
spectacular. And that’s the
muthafuckin truth! As a matter of
fact, I see success in your future!
SQUEEZE
This has taken a turn that none of
us could have foreseen.
LANGSTON
Both o’ y’all- just walk!
Cassius backs up, turns around and walks away into the office
building.
53 INT. FANCY ELEVATOR- MORNING 53
Cassius walks into the elevator and takes a piece of paper
out of his pocket. There is a long passcode scribbled on it.
He reads from it and punches in a 30-digit code.
ELEVATOR VOICE
Greetings, Cassius Green. I hope
you did not masturbate today. We
need you sharp and ready to go. I
detect the pheromones percolating
out of your pores. They say to
others around you: “I have shown up
to work to kick some ass. Hold my
penis while I piss on your
underestimated expectations.” Mr.
Green, I am a computer but I wish I
had hands to caress your muscular
brain. Today is your day.
The elevator door starts to open but malfunctions and closes
and opens. Cassius pushes the “open door” button, trying to
open the door.
ELEVATOR VOICE (CONT’D)
You have the power to shape the
world to your liking. You can make
the world bend over at your whim.
YouElevator door opens.
CASSIUS
What is theWhite 5/17/17 45.
54 INT. POWER CALLING SUITE- MORNING 54
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
-deal with that elevator voice
thing?
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Did you study the materials?
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Sure did.
FANCY SUIT GUY’S ASSISTANT
Great. But no one speaks to our
valuable contacts without the test.
Jill, get the Iso-booth ready.
55 INT. ISO-BOOTH- DAY 55
Cassius enters an almost pitch-black booth, which is a little
bigger than a phone booth, and stands. He has no clothes on.
FANCY SUIT GUY’S ASSISTANT
(O.S.- via loudspeaker)
We’ll start easy. Use your normal
voice. What does JASSM stand for?
CASSIUS
JASSM is the Joint Air to Surface
Standoff Missile.
FANCY SUIT GUY’S ASSISTANT
What kind of warhead does it carry?
CASSIUS
JASSM’s 1000-pound warhead can be
fitted as nuclear, chemical,
conventional, or biological.
FANCY SUIT GUY’S ASSISTANT
Good. How much does it cost?
CASSIUS
The JASSM costs 1.5 miA piercingly loud buzzer sounds, a red light flashes, and
Cassius is doused by a flood of dozens of gallons of water.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
Shit! Fuck! Cold!
White 5/17/17 46.
FANCY SUIT GUY’S ASSISTANT
Wrong. Well, almost right. Say it
like a salesman.
CASSIUS
Uh, the JASSM costs $300,000 less
than the Tomohawk?
FANCY SUIT GUY’S ASSISTANT
Good. What percentage is the
average annual rise in profit for
first-year clients of Worryfree as
compared to the prior year?
Silence.
CASSIUS
Please repeat.
FANCY SUIT GUY’S ASSISTANT
What percentage is the average
annual rise in profit for firstyear clients of Worryfree as
compared to the prior year?
CASSIUS
Can you please re-phrase the quLoud buzzer, red light flashes, Cassius is doused with water.
56 INT. POWER CALLING SUITE- DAY 56
Cassius walks through the halls of the Power Calling suite
wearing a towel- clothes in one arm, briefcase in the other.
57 INT. CASSIUS’S OFFICE- DAY 57
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
You’ve been assigned a Worryfree
campaign. Brush up on that 6th
chapter stuff, and start calling in
the next half hour. It’s 2pm.
Almost breakfast time in Japan.
CASSIUS
Ok.
Cassius, still in his towel, sits at his desk and unfolds the
photocopied picture from the cubicle. The man in the
photocopied picture has a skeptical look on his face. As he
dresses, Cassius starts leafing through a manual.
White 5/17/17 47.
He closes it without reading much and picks up the phone.
While dialing he looks at a portfolio of his prospective
client.
WOMAN ON PHONE
Softbank, Konichiwa!
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Konichiwa! Mr. Masayoshi Son,
please. This is Cassius Green from
Worryfree. Yes, I’ll hold.
Cassius listens to hold music while finishing dressing.
WOMAN ON PHONE
I’m very sorry, Mr. Son does not
come in at this time.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
No problem. I’ll call his cell.
Cassius looks at the portfolio for the number and dials. He
crashes down into a bathroom. A man is on the toilet.
58 INT. FANCY JAPANESE RESIDENTIAL BATHROOM- DAY 58
PERSON ON PHONE
Mushi mushi.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Good evening, Mr. Son. Cassius
Green for WorryFree here. I’m sorry
to bother you, but I wanted talk to
you about who’s assembling your
cell phones. No, I KNOW they’re
getting put together in China. I’m
a fan of your work. I’ve followed
you since you were with Mitsubishi.
I literally cheered when I read
that you acquired SanRio. Which is
why I’m calling you- not Motorola.
Cassius pushes the bidet button, which has an illustrated
picture of water spraying on a butt, on Mr. Son’s toilet.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
(CONT’D)
With our focused work force, we’ll
get your phones assembled twice as
fast at half the cost. You can
double market share over those
bastards.
White 5/17/17 48.
59 INT. POWER CALLING SUITE- DAY 59
A bunch of sharply dressed Power Callers, including Cassius,
are gathered in the Power Calling Suite’s lobby.
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Let’s toast to Cassius Green! He
miraculously just made our client,
Worryfree, upwards of $10 million
in one call! On the first day, no
less! One for the history books.
The Power Callers raise their glasses and toast. Cassius
walks over to Fancy Suit Guy.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Hey, excuse meFANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
How can I do you for, amigo?
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
I know that this is my first day
here. However, I have just put
through the miracle sale and I’m in
a terrible financial bind. I...
(normal voice) I need a cash
advance.
60 INT. OFFICE BUILDING LOBBY- DAY 60
Cassius struts triumphantly out of the elevator, past the
windowed work area of regular callers who are doing another
“Phone’s down!” action. He pushes the door open and magically
struts straight into his uncle Sergio’s dining room.
61 INT. SERGIO’S DINING ROOM- DUSK 61
Sergio is sitting at the dinner table with his wife and
children. He looks up at Cassius who proudly shoves a check
in his face. Sergio reads the check and is visibly moved to
joy. Sergio gets up and hugs Cassius while handing the check
to his wife who is also moved to joy. Cassius breaks from
Sergio’s hug as he and his wife still celebrate and struts
out the door.
62 EXT. CASSIUS’S STUDIO APARTMENT- NIGHT 62
Cassius struts over to his car, which is a damn bucket. He
opens the driver side door, climbs in and slams the door.
White 5/17/17 49.
63 INT. CASSIUS’S CAR- NIGHT 63
Cassius’s “bucket” is now a brand new Black Mercedes-Benz
sports car. He smirks and drives.
64 EXT. STREET CORNER- NIGHT 64
DETROIT is spinning an arrow shaped sign that says “Sale”.
Cassius pulls up in the Benz. She looks confused and
surprised. She hops in, hanging the “Sale” sign out the open
passenger window. They drive to Cassius’s house.
65 INT. CASSIUS’S STUDIO APARTMENT- NIGHT 65
CASSIUS and DETROIT fall onto the bed, making out
passionately. The furniture around them changes, one item at
a time, to more visibly more expensive versions of each item.
First the TV, then chairs, then end tables then the bed on
which they continue to make out- which gets too big for the
room.
66 INT. CASSIUS’S CHIC APARTMENT- MORNING 66
Finally, it is clear that they are actually in a large, chic
apartment in a different building altogether.
It’s morning. CASSIUS and DETROIT are sleeping in bed in a
position similar to the scene before when they were making
out. Cassius wakes, sits up in bed and stares out the window
at a beautiful view of the city. He grabs the remote, sits
up, and turns on the television. As he does this, he
inadvertently pulls most of the covers off sleeping Detroit.
On the screen is the WorryFree aesthetically luxurious prison
cell that we saw earlier. There is an oversized, gaudy
chandelier hanging in the middle. The decor is Victorian era,
with the six bunks seemingly made up with velvet and silk
blankets and built with brass. There is fancy wallpaper. It’s
so gaudy that it almost looks like The Old Spaghetti Factory.
Words flash on the screen: “MTV Cribs: WorryFree Edition!”
MTV ANNOUNCER
Up next on MTV Cribs, WorryFree
Edition: Hole Puncher, Ben Ellman.
The show does a typical MTV-style cut to a shot of Benjamin45 year-old White guy- pointing to his bunk, with his wife
under the covers. There are other couples in the other bunks.
His wife is giving the camera a fake smile.
White 5/17/17 50.
BEN ELLMAN- OVERDUB BY BLACK ACTOR
This is where the magic happens,
baby!
Cassius changes channels. A man gets beaten with a fish by a
man in lederhosen. It’s “I Got The S#*@ Kicked Outta Me!”.
GAME SHOW AUDIENCE
I got the [beep] kicked outta me!
Cassius changes the channel. It’s the local news. The news
cameras show a militant strike, with chanting, picket signs,
tussles with the police, and scabs being hit on the headwalking away holding their bleeding heads. The strike is in
front of Regalview. There are hundreds, maybe thousands that
seem to be part of the strike. The action is narrated.
TV NEWS REPORTER (V.O.)
Chuck, this was the scene yesterday
at the Regalview telemarketers
strike.
Chyron on the TV screen reads “Telemarketers Strike. Day 40.”
We see about 30 cops with riot gear and shields crouched
down, shielding themselves, in the middle of an intersection.
They are being pelted by a hailstorm of soda cans and rocks
from the crowd of thousands around them. The scene looks very
much like footage from student protests in Korea.
TV NEWS REPORTER (V.O.)
The striking Regalview workers are
joined by other telemarketers,
phone operators, and university
students from all over the area.
We see SQUEEZE making a speech to the crowd. He is holding
and talking into a bullhorn while talking into a microphone
that a reporter is holding.
SQUEEZE
We are Telemarketers! We are used
to being hung up on! Blocked! And
ignored! But we won’t let Regalview
block, ignore, or hang up on us!
Cassius changes the channel back to MTV Cribs: WorryFree
Edition. They are in an expansive dining hall of the
WorryFree complex. There are tables that seem to stretch as
long as three city blocks. Benjamin Ellman walks into frame.
BEN ELLMAN- OVERDUB BY BLACK ACTOR
After a long day of hearty-ass
work, you feel me, we ready to eat.
This is where we get our grub onWhite 5/17/17 51.
Cassius changes the channel back to “I Got The S#*@ Kicked
Outta Me!” A contestant is soaking wet, with bloodshot eyes,
excitedly talking to the host.
GAME SHOW CONTESTANT
Swimming through the vat of hyena
urine is not as bad as it sounds!
I’m just happy to be on here!
Cassius changes the channel back to the news.
SQUEEZE
What do we want!? We want enough
money to pay the rent!
CROWD
Yeah!
SQUEEZE
We want enough money to eat
something besides Cup ‘O Noodles
every night!
CROWD
Yeah!
SQUEEZE
We want to be able to go to the
doctor if we get drunk one night!
CROWD
Yeah!
SQUEEZE
And hook up with somebody without
protection!
CROWD
Yeah!
SQUEEZE
And we think we might have
contracted gonorrhea! Or chlamydia!
Or any one of those crazy STDs you
never heard of that they have on
Self-Diagnosis.com!
Crowd stares silently.
White 5/17/17 52.
TV NEWS REPORTER (V.O.)
Although strikers have kept most
replacement workers from breaking
the strike- every morning,
Blackwater security agents
successfully escort Regalview’s
elite Power Callers into the
building.
A group of ten uniformed men in full riot-gear, masks, and
shields rush, full-speed, from the sidewalk across the street
toward the strikers. They’re the size of NFL linebackers.
They make a protective perimeter around people who are much
smaller in size and very fashionably dressed- who are also
rushing full-speed, moving as one unit with the Blackwater
agents. In that group: CASSIUS, FANCY SUIT GUY, FANCY SUIT
GUY’S ASSISTANT, and others. We recognize CASSIUS due to his
very bright colored suit. In one fluid, violent motion, we
see the Blackwater agents rush, punch, push, and smash their
way through the strike line toward the front door. They get
the Power Callers into the building, leaving a mass of
bloody, enraged strikers.
TV NEWS REPORTER (V.O.)
For more on the Regalview strCASSIUS turns the TV off. He’s contemplative. He notices that
Detroit is awake and has been watching the news with him.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Hey, baby. Good morning.
DETROIT
No. Please no. Stop that stupid
voice, Cassius.
Detroit pulls some of the covers back towards herself.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
I didn’t- (normal voice) I didn’t
even realizeDETROIT
That’s a problem.
CASSIUS
Sorry... How long you been awake?
DETROIT
I’m not awake yet. But I saw your
TV debutThe man in the framed picture bows his head in shame.
White 5/17/17 53.
Detroit pulls the covers more as she turns over- facing away
from Cassius, who has to hold on to remain covered.
DETROIT (CONT’D)
Cash, baby. I cCassius turns over in bed, away from Detroit.
CASSIUS
C’mon, can we notDETROIT
Look. I quit when the strike jumped
off because being with you made it
awkward. But you abandoned your
friendsCASSIUS
I thought they’d do a few work
stoppages and Regalview would cave.
DETROIT
It’s one thing to take the
promotion, but now you’re a full
out scabCASSIUS
Power Callers ain’t on strike!
Detroit pulls the covers more toward herself.
DETROIT
They should be! I’m tired of talkin
about this. You’re crossing the
picket line. I can’t ride with you.
CASSIUS
Oh, but you was riding fine whenDETROIT
No more.
CASSIUS
What are you sayin’? You’re askin’
me to quit the fattest job I’ve
ever hadDETROIT
It’s not fat. It’s morally
emaciated. You sell fucking slave
labor.
CASSIUS
What the fuck ISN’T slave labor?
White 5/17/17 54.
DETROIT
Side-stepping. You side-step more
than the fucking Temptations.
Cassius pulls the covers toward him, off of Detroit.
CASSIUS
Fuck you. I’m finally good at
something. Really good. I fucking
make shit happen. I’m important.
You can’t see it because you’ve
always had it. You’re worried about
slave labor? You think Squeeze and
them are changing that? They ain’t
gon’ do shit. And sellin’ art to
rich people ain’t gon do shit
either!
DETROIT
Gimme the damn covers!
Detroit stands up to leave, attempting to take the covers
with her. Cassius grabs and pulls the covers. Detroit lets
go. Cassius falls back onto the floor.
CASSIUS
D. One of the reasons I took this
job in the first place was to make
myself interesting enough to keep
you.
DETROIT
The old you was way more
interesting. If you go to work
today at Regalview- crossing the
picket line- we’re done.
67 EXT. OFFICE BUILDING- MORNING 67
Extreme close-up on CASSIUS. He is pissed and tearing up. We
pull out to see he’s in the middle of the other Power
Callers, encircled by the Blackwater agents. They are across
the street from the Regalview building and strikers.
BLACKWATER AGENT #1
Elbows and assholes, people! Let’s
go!
OTHER BLACKWATER AGENTS
Hut! Hut! Move!
White 5/17/17 55.
They run quickly together. Although we only see CASSIUS’s
face during this we hear the thuds and curses of strikers and
Blackwater agents. The corners of the frame behind Cassius’s
face are filled with yellow and violet smoke from the smoke
grenades that the Blackwater agents have set off.
68 INT. POWER CALLING SUITE- MORNING 68
CASSIUS and other Power Callers file out of the elevator.
CASSIUS slowly walks to his office and sits down.
He looks around. Business as usual. He opens a portfolio and
begins to make a call. He sees FANCY SUIT GUY.
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Well, we made it.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
I’m gonna just follow up on this
thing I’ve been working on.
Cassius stops, as if having second thoughts. He looks over at
the photocopied picture. The man seems to be staring
disapprovingly.
He looks again and the man in the picture is back to his
normal pose. He shakes it off and dials confidently.
69 INT. POWER CALLING SUITE- DAY 69
The Power Callers are all gathered in the Power Calling suite
lobby.
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
This. Mother. Fucker. Is. On. Fire!
Let’s toast to boy wonder!
The Power Callers raise their glasses and toast to Cassius,
who looks very proud and accomplished.
70 EXT. STREET- NIGHT 70
CASSIUS drives down the street in his new car. He parks in
front of the gallery where DETROIT is hanging up her Africas
with help from a half dozen others. A giant poster announces
the opening as being “Tomorrow!” CASSIUS watches Detroit
through the big windows for a few seconds then speeds off.
White 5/17/17 56.
71 INT. CASSIUS’S CHIC APARTMENT- NIGHT 71
Cassius sleeps alone in his big bed.
72 EXT. OFFICE BUILDING- MORNING 72
Cassius, again, is surrounded by other Power Callers who are
surrounded by Blackwater agents. Once again, they all run
across the street together- straight toward the strikers. We
see the hand of one of the strikers shaking up a soda can and
throwing it. It sails beautifully through the air and lands
perfectly on CASSIUS’S forehead, which then gushes with
blood.
CASSIUS
Fuck!!!
FEMALE VOICE (O.S.)
Have a Coke and a smile, bitch!
The group does not stop their blitz into the building. Thud,
smash, push, in the building.
73 INT. POWER CALLING SUITE- DAY 73
FANCY SUIT GUY is standing outside of Cassius’s office,
watching as Cassius finishes up a call. Cassius notices FANCY
SUIT GUY while hanging up. Cassius has a bandage on his head.
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
You, my friend, are the best
decision I’ve made in quite a long
time. I have to pat myself on the
ass for that.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Thank you, Mr. _____. It’s good to
be appreciated.
Whenever FANCY SUIT GUY’s name is said, it is bleeped out and
the mouth of the person speaking is pixelated to hide the
name.
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Don’t call me Mr. _____. Call me
______. Cassius, do you like to
party?
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
I like parties.
White 5/17/17 57.
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
What are you doing tonight?
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
I’ve got a couple things to follow
up on here and my girl- I mean my
ex-girl has aBlood drips from Cassius’s bandage onto his face. Fancy Suit
Guy reaches and wipes Cassius’s face with a handkercheif.
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Fuck all that. Check it: Steve Lift
is throwing his yearly party and
wants to see our new star there. He
wants to talk to you.
Fancy Suit Guy holds a copy of GQ. Steve Lift’s on the cover.
Steve Lift’s book is also on Cassius’s desk.
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
(CONT’D)
I’ve been waiting years to get an
invite. Jay and Bey can’t even get
an invite.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Hell yeah! But I have toFANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Go to your other thing and I’ll
pick you up after. This kind of
party could change your life74 INT. GALLERY- EVENING 74
The Gallery is filled with people who are dressed to the
nines. This is the opening of Detroit’s show.
Cassius walks in and makes his way through the crowd towards
Detroit. She’s at the other end of the room, talking to a
circle of art enthusiasts. She’s wearing metallic earrings
with big, easy to read letters. Her right earring: “You’re
Gonna Have To Fight” and her left one: “Your Own Damn War”.
DETROIT- OVERDUB BY BRITISH ACTOR
I wanted to talk about how beauty,
love and laughter is still able to
thrive and flourish under almost
any circumstances. I realized thatDetroit sees Cassius coming toward her.
White 5/17/17 58.
DETROIT- OVERDUB BY BRITISH ACTOR
(CONT’D)
Please excuse me for a moment?
Detroit walks over to Cassius.
CASSIUS
I wouldn’t miss this for the world.
This is beautiful. You’re
beautiful. I love you. I want usDETROIT
I love you, too. But I can’t hang
with the coldness I see in you now.
Cassius is dejected.
DETROIT (CONT’D)
What happened to your head?
CASSIUS
Nothing. Cut myself shaving.
DETROIT
I have to go get ready for the
performance. You really should stay
to see it.
CASSIUS
I can stay for a little, but I have
to meet an important person at a
party.
DETROIT
Slave auctioneers party?
Cassius walks and grabs an already poured glass of champagne
from the bar which is next to them. He looks up and Sal and
Squeeze are walking toward him.
DETROIT (CONT’D)
Hey, Squeeze. Thank you so much for
coming.
SQUEEZE
I wouldn’t miss this for the world.
DETROIT
You always know the right thing to
say.
CASSIUS
I said that a second ago.
White 5/17/17 59.
Detroit walks away.
SALVADOR
Long time, no hear. Do you not call
me anymore because you’re a
sellout, or because you’re a star?
CASSIUS
A star? WhatSalvador shoves a smartphone in front of Cassius’s face. It
is a YouTube clip that is paused on a blurry Coca-Cola can
which is in flight over the heads of a crowd. Salvador
presses play and it shows the can hitting Cassius’s head. It
is the scene from that morning. When the can hits, a cartoon
like “Boing!” sound effect happens. Salvador laughs loudly
and puts the smartphone back in his pocket.
SALVADOR
11 million views already, man!
You’re the Justin Bieber of
backstabbers.
SQUEEZE
Look, we could use your help right
now. We have them by the balls, but
they’re holding out. We’re at an
important point. We have info on
how much this is costing them. If
we make them lose a little more,
they’ll have to meet our demands.
You jumping sides now could turn
the tide.
CASSIUS
ISQUEEZE
I saw something in you before that
must still be in there. Don’t be
that leaf that floats down the
river- be the stone that shifts the
stream.
SALVADOR
Shit, man. Piss your own stream.
CASSIUS
I hear you, but let’s talk about it
this weekend. I gotta think about
it.
SQUEEZE
Okay. I’ll definitely call you.
White 5/17/17 60.
A gong sounds and everyone in the gallery turns toward it.
Detroit is standing at the gong, wearing a black trenchcoat
and aviator sunglasses.
DETROIT- OVERDUB BY BRITISH ACTOR
Welcome, friends! Gather around.
Form a semi-circle. Tonight, we
will have a transformative
experience. In those containers
there are broken cell phones, used
bullet casings, and water balloons
filled with sheep’s blood.
Cellphones can only work with the
mineral Coltan, which is only found
in Africa’s Congo. The profit
involved in this has created
hardship and wars. I will stand
here. If you feel so moved, you may
throw the items in the containers
at me. While I stand here, I will
be reciting an excerpt from the
timeless Motown-produced movie
entitled “The Last Dragon”. I will
recite the lines that Angela says
to Eddie Arcadian as she leaves
him.
Detroit takes the trenchcoat off and is naked, save for the
sunglasses.
DETROIT- OVERDUB BY BRITISH ACTOR
(CONT’D)
Let’s begin.
Detroit bangs the gong.
DETROIT- OVERDUB BY BRITISH ACTOR
(CONT’D)
(Almost whispering)
And in the end, Eddie, you know
what? You’re nothing but a
misguided midget asshole with
dreams of ruling the world. Yeah,
also from Kew Gardens. And also
getting by on my tits.
Silence.
DETROIT- OVERDUB BY BRITISH ACTOR
(CONT’D)
(Softly)
And in the end, Eddie, you know
what?
(MORE)
White 5/17/17 61.
You’re nothing but a misguided
midget asshole with dreams of
ruling the world. Yeah, also from
Kew Gardens. And also getting by on
my tits.
One cellphone is thrown. Then a bullet casing.
DETROIT- OVERDUB BY BRITISH ACTOR
(CONT’D)
(A little louder)
And in the end, Eddie, you know
what? You’re nothing but a
misguided midget asshole with
dreams of ruling the world. Yeah,
also from Kew Gardens. And also
getting by on my tits.
Water balloons of blood are busted on her. Cellphones and
bullets are being thrown. It looks painful.
DETROIT- OVERDUB BY BRITISH ACTOR
(CONT’D)
(yelling)
And in the end! Eddie! You know
what!? You’re! Nothing! But a
misguided midget! Asshole! With
dreams! of ruling the world! Yeah!
also from Kew Gardens! And also!
getting by on my tits!
She is really getting pelted. Cassius angrily rushes in to
the middle of the chaos, dodging as he goes.
CASSIUS
Ay! Aay!! Stop! Wait a fucking
minute!
The pelting stops.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
Stop! What the hell is going on
here?!
(to Detroit)
Why would you subject yourself to
this?
DETROIT
It’s part of the show. You, of all
people, should know that. Stick to
the script.
Detroit reaches down, grabs a black football helmet and puts
it on.
DETROIT- OVERDUB BY BRITISH ACTOR
White 5/17/17 62.
DETROIT (CONT’D)
Don’t you have a party to go to?
(to the audience, overdub
by a British actor)
Begin again! And in the end! Eddie!
You know what!? You’re! Nothing...
Cassius gets out of harm’s way, walks through the crowd,
walks out of the gallery.
75 EXT. GALLERY- NIGHT 75
Cassius gets in his car while soliloquy and pelting continue.
76 INT. STEVE LIFT’S MANSION- NIGHT 76
We see a close up of a nose snorting an extra long line of
cocaine that takes about 10 seconds to finish. The nose
belongs to Steve Lift. He lifts his head quickly, to stand.
STEVE LIFT
I guess you’re all wondering why
I’ve called this meeting.
Laughter.
A DJ spins a record and loud music starts. About 200 people
are partying in an extremely decadent mansion. Some are
talking on couches and chairs. Some are standing. Some are
dancing. Most of them are drinking and smoking weed. 99
percent of them are white. On one wall is Detroit’s defaced
“Responsible babbydaddy”/”Response, baby” billboard. It has
been mounted, framed, and lit like a museum piece.
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Hey! Steve!
STEVE LIFT
You sweet sexy motherfucker. Are
you loving the new digs or what?
Subtitle reads: “My dick is bigger than yours, FYI.”
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Love it.
Subtitle reads “Yes, boss. Your dick is bigger than mine.”
STEVE LIFT
Stick around, because most of these
bitches are probably gonna get
naked later.
White 5/17/17 63.
Subtitle reads “Again, my dick is bigger than yours and most
of these lovely women are actually going to get naked later.
For reals.”
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Of course. Your parties are the
stuff of folklore. Steve, meet the
man of the hourCASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Cassius Green, it’s a pleasure to
meet you. An honor.
STEVE LIFT
Hola, compadre. Necesitan algun...
Aw, fuck. Who am I kiddin’? No
hablos español. You’re not one of
those Spanish people that just look
Black are you?
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
No, Mr. Lift. I’m just Black.
STEVE LIFT
Please, don’t call me Mister.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Okay. Steve. For sureSTEVE LIFT
Nope. That doesn’t feel right. Just
call me sir.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Yes, sirSTEVE LIFT
I’m just kidding. Call me whatever
the fuck you want- just keep makin’
that fuckin money. You must be a
fucking genius. I’d love to pick
your brain because we need people
like you over at WorryFree. People
who can comprehend the bigger
picture. It’s people like you who
are gonna save this nation, Green.
I mean, don’t get me wrong- we need
the workers to do the actual work,
per se. But we need people like
you, too, that can be trusted. But
that can analyze the challenges and
adapt... Like a snake. Or a
cockroach.
(MORE)
White 5/17/17 64.
Or a little fiendish raccoon
scavenging through a garbage can.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Thanks.
77 INT. GALLERY- NIGHT 77
The gallery is almost empty. There is a gigantic mess on the
floor- bullet casings, broken cell phones and water. Detroit
is holding the door as a group of folks leave.
DETROIT
Thank you guys so much for helping
me clean. I’m gonna do the rest
tomorrow. I’m fucking tired. Thank
you, Samiyah! I love you!
SAMIYAH (O.S.)
I love you, too!
DETROIT
(to Squeeze)
So, what did you think?
SQUEEZE
It was... fiery.
Detroit smiles knowingly and locks the door.
Squeeze and Detroit make out aggressively against the wall
and slide down, continuing on the wet floor, bullet casings,
and broken cell phones.
78 INT. STEVE LIFT’S MANSION- NIGHT 78
The party is still happening. STEVE LIFT, CASSIUS, FANCY SUIT
GUY, and a bunch of others are sitting on the couch and
around it. Some people are still dancing. Those on the couch
and around it are listening intently to STEVE LIFT.
STEVE LIFT
...I had to climb up on the side of
the overturned jeep and pry the AK
from under the crushed seat where
my dead, and bloody guide was. When
the rhino charged again, he got a
head full of lead. Brrr-rat-ta-tata-ta! Brains all over the place. I
made that motherfucker into a
trophy.
STEVE LIFT (CONT'D)
White 5/17/17 65.
Steve gestures toward a wall where a disgusting, gory,
tattered head of a rhinoceros is mounted.
STEVE LIFT (CONT’D)
Hey, Cassius. You ever had to put a
cap in anybody’s ass?
Laughter.
FANCY SUIT GUY- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Green? NoSTEVE LIFT
Shut up, _______. I’m talking to
the man of the hour here. I wanna
hear about some of that Oakland
gangsta shit. Oaktown!
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
No, sir. Luckily, I haven’t had to
cap anybody yet. Sorry. No gangster
stories for ya.
STEVE LIFT
Hmmm. Ok. Give us something man. We
work hard, we party hard. These
type of motherfuckers are at my
party every year. You’re different.
Leave an impression. At least take
off the White Voice. I know you can
at least bust a rap for us or
somethin’.
CASSIUS
Actually, I can’t rap worth shit.
It’s embarrassing.
STEVE LIFT
Bullshit!
CASSIUS
For real, I don’t rap. I don’t know
how to rap. I’m hella good at
LISTENIN’ to some rap, though.
STEVE LIFT
Fuck that, man! You’re lying! Rap!
Rap! Rap! Rap!
First FANCY SUIT GUY, then the whole party catches on and
starts chanting “Rap! Rap! Rap! Rap!” Cassius slowly and
reluctantly heads toward the DJ booth after being handed a
microphone.
White 5/17/17 66.
The crowd is hyped- whooping, hollering, and dancing hard to
the intstrumental that the DJ is playing for Cassius to rap
to. Cassius bobs to the beat to stall a little. FinallyCASSIUS
W’sup... My name is Cash/I love
to...
He can’t finish.
PERSON AT PARTY
Smash!
CASSIUS
One, two... I come from the city of
dope/Couldn’t be saved by John The
Pope/I like to...
He can’t finish. He goes back to bobbing his head and
slightly dancing. The music does a drum fill which will
obviously lead it into the chorus. He gets an idea and comes
in on the beat, looking unsure as he says it.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
Nigga shit! Nigga, Nigga, Nigga
shit!/Nigga shit! Nigga, Nigga,
Nigga shit!/Nigga shit! Nigga,
Nigga, Nigga shit!
The crowd reacts wildly and chants along with him loudly,
including STEVE LIFT and FANCY SUIT GUY. The crowd dances
with each other, with some freaking and doing booty dances.
Some are on couches, chairs and tables. This seems to go on
for a while. We see from Cassius’s facial expression that he
is troubled with what he is doing.
79 INT. STEVE LIFT’S MANSION- NIGHT 79
CASSIUS sits on a chair alone, drinking bourbon, distraught
by his performance. The party happening through the door on
his left is in slow-motion while Cassius is normal speed. We
only hear the sound of Cassius’s breathing and drinking. His
formerly white bandage is partly brownish-red with blood.
He’s still bleeding. He wipes his forehead with a
handkerchief as he looks to his right. The exit door.
We pull back to see that he is at the end of a long hallway.
We pull back past party-goers- some having sex on couches
that line the hallway, some passed out, sitting against the
walls.
We see the back of FANCY SUIT GUY walking down the hallway
toward CASSIUS. We follow him back to CASSIUS.
White 5/17/17 67.
As we follow, we hear only: CASSIUS breathing and drinking,
FANCY SUIT GUY’s footsteps, and the sound of a couch banging
the wall from someone having sex.
FANCY SUIT GUY kneels down beside CASSIUS. FANCY SUIT GUY’s
nose has white powder all over it.
FANCY SUIT GUY
Yo. Steve wants you back there.
FANCY SUIT GUY is not speaking with his White Voice. He
motions toward a closed door at the back of the party room.
We now hear the music, but the surroundings- other than
Cassius and FANCY SUIT GUY- are still in slow motion.
FANCY SUIT GUY (CONT’D)
Go through that door, all the way
down the hall. Make a right, then a
left... then go through the third
door on your left, make a right and
you’ll see it. It’s the magenta
door...
Cassius gets up. As he does, the surroundings go back to
normal speed and the music is at full blast.
FANCY SUIT GUY (CONT’D)
Ay. We don’t cry about what should
be, we thrive on what is. This
could be big. Don’t fuck it up.
As Cassius walks away, we see that a small group of people
are watching a YouTube video of Cassius being hit by the Coke
can on a gigantic flatscreen. They are laughing hysterically.
80 INT. MANSION HALLWAY- NIGHT 80
CASSIUS opens the first door and goes through it. He goes
down the dark yet lavishly decorated hallway. After he turns
the first time, he is in a different kind of hallway. It’s
white. It almost looks like a hospital. When he turns the
second time, there are windows that reveal small laboratories
with the lights turned off for the night. One of the rooms
that he sees through its window is full of levers, ropes,
pulleys, and metal wheels. He finally gets to the door which
is painted magenta and goes through it.
81 INT. LIFT’S PRIVATE OFFICE/LOUNGE- NIGHT 81
CASSIUS enters a spacious and luxurious room that has a desk
as the centerpiece and a giant video screen behind it.
White 5/17/17 68.
The room is decorated with an equine motif. There are
paintings- some small, some oversized- with horses and
centaurs. One of the pieces is quite sexual, involving a
woman and a horse. The desk itself is a ridiculously gaudy
thing that involves two sculptured horses, side-by-side,
holding up a table. There is a small dish with apples on the
desk, over to one side. STEVE LIFT is behind the desk,
leaning back in his chair. He seems coked out and has a small
mirror in front of him with cocaine residue and a straw
laying on it. He throws an apple to CASSIUS, who catches it.
STEVE LIFT
Heads up!
CASSIUS
This room is nuts.
STEVE LIFT
Thank you. I’ll accept that backhanded compliment. Pull up a chair,
Cassius Green.
Cassius sits.
STEVE LIFT (CONT’D)
Is your head okay?
CASSIUS
Perfect.
STEVE LIFT
Well, here in Lift’s lair, we’ll do
no line before it’s time. And it’s
time, my friend. You’re rollin’
with the big dogs.
STEVE LIFT pushes a commemorative plate from “The Mr. Ed
Show” across the table toward CASSIUS. It has a line of
cocaine which circles around into a spiral shape. CASSIUS
pauses for a second, then snorts the spiral line.
CASSIUS
Shit!
STEVE LIFT
I wanna propose something, Cash.
CASSIUS
And I wanna listen to your
proposal, Stevie.
STEVE LIFT
We need you at WorryFree. I see
something in you.
(MORE)
White 5/17/17 69.
You’re more than just the best
telemarketer the world has seen
since Hal Jameson.
CASSIUS
That’s interesting. Yet boring.
Tell me something I don’t know.
Something with zeros and commas.
STEVE LIFT
Cocky. I like that. You’ll
understand the proposal if you
watch this video we put together.
CASSIUS
Can I take a piss first?
STEVE LIFT
No.
STEVE LIFT picks up a remote control and starts the video.
It’s a commercial video showing still pictures of pastoral
green settings. Corny electronic music plays as these still
pictures flash on screen. Cassius is uncomfortable and
obviously has to pee. A WorryFree logo appears.
CASSIUS
I actually hella have to piss.
The video pauses.
STEVE LIFT
Fine. Right out the door. It’s the
jade colored door. Hurry back.
82 INT. MANSION HALLWAY- NIGHT 82
Cassius rushes out the door into the hallway. He goes to the
right and finds the jade door and rushes in.
83 INT. WASHROOM- NIGHT 83
The room is a darkly-lit, yet sanitary looking room with
bathroom tiles on the wall, a sink, a mirror some curtains
for what seems like showers, and one metallic stall. We can
see that there’s a guy in the stall because we see his head.
CASSIUS
Fuck! Only one stall? Are you on
your way out or in?
STEVE LIFT (CONT'D)
White 5/17/17 70.
GUY IN STALL
Can you help me?
Cassius walks toward the stall. The man’s breathing is
audibly heavy.
CASSIUS
Naw, man. Is this some- I’m notGUY IN STALL
Please, help me. I’m fucked up. I’m
hurting.
GUY IN STALL leans suddenly against the door and bumps it, as
if ready to fall.
CASSIUS
Aight. Hold on, mCassius opens the stall door, and GUY IN STALL falls out onto
the floor, revealing that he’s a naked part-man, part-horse.
There is no hair on his entire man-horse body, save for the
normal patches of hair that a hairy man might have. Unlike a
mythical centaur, there are no extra limbs. His hind legs
have human feet, his front legs have human hands. He is very
sweaty and has humongous horse-like nostrils.
His human eyes show that he is terrified.
He is chained and collared to the stall.
He let’s out a chilling whinny.
Cassius is suddenly terrified and screams out while backing
up.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
Fuck! Shit! Fuck fuck fuck fuck
fuck! What the fuck! What the fuck!
GUY IN STALL
Please, help me. I’m hurting.
He let’s out a whinny.
CASSIUS turns to run out, but the floor is slippery and he
runs into the shower curtain, bumping something behind it.
This is not actually a shower, but another stall. Another manhorse sticks his head out from behind the curtain. He
whinnies.
SECOND GUY IN STALL
Please help me. I’m hurting.
White 5/17/17 71.
Other heads of men and women stick their heads out of
curtains, whinnying, neighing, and saying “Please help us.”
84 INT. MANSION HALLWAY- NIGHT 84
Cassius bolts out of the door, straight into STEVE LIFT, who
blocks his exit.
CASSIUS
The fuck!?
STEVE LIFT
Asshole! I said the jade door!
CASSIUS
That is the jade door!
STEVE LIFT
That door is obviously olive! Not
jade! It is very clearly an olive
colored door!
CASSIUS
Get me the fuck outta here!
STEVE LIFT forcefully puts both hands on CASSIUS’s shoulders.
STEVE LIFT
Ok. Big, big misunderstanding.
Let’s both calm, Breathe. Let’s go
back to my office. I’ll explain. Do
you still have to go pee?
CASSIUS
I pissed in my fucking pants, man.
So, no, I don’t have to pee
anymore. I am so fucking outta
here!
CASSIUS shakes his shoulder free of STEVE LIFT and tries to
run away. STEVE LIFT pulls a silver 9mm pistol from the small
of his back.
STEVE LIFT
Ok. Breathe. Calm. Big
misunderstanding. Let me explain.
85 INT. LIFT’S PRIVATE LOUNGE- NIGHT 85
CASSIUS sits in his chair while STEVE LIFT leans back on the
desk, facing CASSIUS.
White 5/17/17 72.
We see that the pistol is on the desk next to STEVE LIFT,
who’s hand is on it. Cassius is sweating, nervous, and
scared.
STEVE LIFT
Dude. I can’t let you go without
explaining. If you had seen the
video before you saw that in there,
you wouldn’t have gotten scared.
CASSIUS
And just what in the fuck was “that
in there”?
STEVE LIFT
The video will explain.
STEVE LIFT clicks the remote.
The video plays from where it was paused.
The screen shows the WorryFree logo, which quickly fades out.
The screen then reads, “The New Miracle”. Underneath,
“Directed by Michel Gondry” fades in.
STEVE LIFT (CONT’D)
(O.S.)
We paid a pretty penny for this
shit.
All the words fade out.
The stills are now moving and we realize that we are watching
stop-motion animation: a lush green countryside with hills
and streams.
A group of six Neanderthal-like apes are trying to break open
a coconut. They are banging it on the dirt and pounding it
with their hands. One of the Neanderthals, a female, turns
and walks toward the camera, naked and very hairy- with hairy
breasts and nipples visible. She speaks with a British
accent.
NEANDERTHAL WOMAN
Since the dawn of time- or at least
since before anyone cares to
remember- we have used our wits to
survive.
A smaller Neanderthal snatches the coconut from a bigger
Neanderthal and smashes it against a rock, cracking it open
and exposing its beautiful treasure. The Neanderthals cheer
with ape-like sounds of excitement.
White 5/17/17 73.
NEANDERTHAL WOMAN (CONT’D)
But what allowed us to thrive was
our use of tools. A natural
development.
The bigger Neanderthal lets out a shrill, furious scream and
smashes the back of the smaller Neanderthal’s head with a
big, pointed rock. The smaller Neanderthal falls over dead.
The others look on in horror. The animation rewinds and
freeze frames on the arm of bigger Neanderthal’s arm smashing
the rock into the smaller one’s head. Blood and pieces of
skull are spurting out, frozen in mid-air.
NEANDERTHAL WOMAN (CONT’D)
But what are toolsA red dotted line is superimposed over the bigger
Neanderthal’s arm, from the shoulder to the tip of his
fingers. A caption reads “Arm”.
NEANDERTHAL WOMAN (CONT’D)
-if not extensions of the
appendages with which we were born?
A yellow dotted line is superimposed over the rock, from the
tip of the bigger Neanderthal’s fingers to the end of the
rock, which is partly in the smaller one’s head. A caption
reads “Rock”. The yellow dotted line turns red and the
caption reading “Rock” disappears. The “Arm” caption moves
center screen.
The arm turns into a Homo sapiens arm and the rock turns into
a hammer. The arm and hammer hammers a nail.
The hammer turns into a TV remote control. The hand clicks
the remote.
NEANDERTHAL WOMAN (O.S.) (CONT’D)
Humans sometime need modification
to perform better in a specified
situation. We have done so
throughout history.
We see boxers sparring in a boxing ring as Neanderthal Woman
walks through the frame.
NEANDERTHAL WOMAN (CONT’D)
We train ourselves to fight.
Neanderthal Woman walks into a weight room.
NEANDERTHAL WOMAN (CONT’D)
We work out.
White 5/17/17 74.
Neanderthal Woman walks into a dorm room where someone is
studying at a desk.
NEANDERTHAL WOMAN (CONT’D)
We study. These changes to the body
and mind are actually chemical
changes.
The dorm room fades away and the WorryFree logo appears
behind Neanderthal Woman.
NEANDERTHAL WOMAN (CONT’D)
WorryFree is continuing that
natural development that started in
pre-historic times. We are proud to
announce to our share holders a new
day in human productivity.
A scientific laboratory appears behind Neanderthal Woman,
with scientists working.
NEANDERTHAL WOMAN (CONT’D)
Our scientists have discovered a
way- a chemical change- to make
humans stronger, more obedient,
more durable and therefore, more
efficient and profitable.
A factory assembly line appears behind Neanderthal Woman,
with a workers pulling levers on machines, lifting widgets
from a conveyor belt, etc.
NEANDERTHAL WOMAN (CONT’D)
At WorryFree, we realize that human
labor is more efficient than robot
labor when it comes to adaptability
of movement for various duties.
But, human labor has its
limitations.
The workers transform into big, hulking, horse-people. They
are lifting more widgets, pulling bigger levers on bigger
machines, producing more widgets. They are all happy.
NEANDERTHAL WOMAN (CONT’D)
We are breaking the limitations.
Our workforce of Equisapiens will
make WorryFree the most profitable
company in human history. And, you,
our shareholders will take that
place in history with us.
Steve Lift stops the video.
White 5/17/17 75.
STEVE LIFT
See what I’m talkin about? Big
misunderstanding.
CASSIUS
Uhn-uhn. No! What do you mean?
There is no fucking
misunderstanding. Are those halfhorse, half-people that you have
created in a lab to make more
money?
STEVE LIFT
Well, yeah. I just didn’t want you
to think I was crazy or something.
Because I’m doing this for a
reason. So, I’m not irrational.
CASSIUS
Aight. Cool. I understand and I
would like to leave now. Please.
STEVE LIFT
But, I didn’t even get to make my
proposal to you.
Cassius starts to get up.
CASSIUS
Can you call me tomorrow about
that? I need to leave now, but I’m
very interested.
Steve Lift puts his hand on the gun. Cassius sits.
STEVE LIFT
You have to see the rest of the
video. There’s a lot of production
value. Then my proposal.
Steve Lift clicks the remote and plays the video.
The animated video shows workers of a factory lining up in
several lines to go through doors.
NEANDERTHAL WOMAN
Our worker modification process is
simple and rather quick. It works
for 70 percent of humans who take
the fusing catalyst.
The workers walk through the doors and are handed silver
straws by men and women in labcoats.
White 5/17/17 76.
Nurses approach the workers with plates full of powder, which
the workers snort through the silver straw. The workers go to
waiting rooms, much like the “washroom” that Cassius entered.
They transform almost magically into horse-people.
STEVE LIFT
This is how weSteve Lift’s voice is drowned out as Cassius flashes back to
his snorting the spiral line of powder on the Mr. Ed plate,
then flashing to the horse-man who fell over in the washroom,
then looking at the animated workers snorting powder and
turning into horse-people. The images flash over and over,
faster and faster. Cassius hyperventilates. His eyes tear up.
CASSIUS
Wait. Hold up. Wait. Wait! What the
fuck did you have me snort!?
Cassius jumps up. Steve Lift grabs the gun.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
Answer me, man! I’m not even high!
STEVE LIFT
You’re not? WhatCassius is in tears.
CASSIUS
(pointing to the gun) Muthafuckathat shit don’t scare me! If you
gave me some mutation shit, I want
you to shoot me!
STEVE LIFT
Cash. What you snorted was 100%
Peruvian.
CASSIUS
Cocaine? It was coke?
STEVE LIFT
You heard what I said.
CASSIUS
You said “100% Peruvian”. Be
precise. They got horses in Peru,
probably.
STEVE LIFT
Dude. You’re gettin’ all semantic
on me.
White 5/17/17 77.
CASSIUS
No. I’m just trying to be clear. If
you were actually meaning horses
when you said “100% Peruvian”, it
would be you who’s being semantic
because- Fuck this shit! Was it
coke or not?
STEVE LIFT
It was cocaine, man. I’m not evil.
This ain’t a movie. This is real
life. I wouldn’t just slip you the
fusing catalyst. You don’t feel
high because your adrenaline is
pumpin’ so hard. You’re harshin’
your buzz.
Steve Lift calms Cassius by motioning him to breathe deeply
with him, pseudo-yoga style. Cassius sits back down.
STEVE LIFT (CONT’D)
Ok?
CASSIUS
Ok.
STEVE LIFT
The proposal I was going to make
was this: This new caliber of
worker. They are bigger, stronger,
and hopefully they don’t gripe as
much. Soon, there will be millions
of them.
CASSIUS
This is crazy.
STEVE LIFT
They’ll develop they’re own
identity and customs. They may wish
to rebel, organize. We need someone
to represent WorryFree’s interests.
Someone they can relate to.
CASSIUS
A manager- that’s a man-horse.
STEVE LIFT
No. An Equisapiens Martin Luther
King. One that we control. One that
we create.
White 5/17/17 78.
CASSIUS
You want to create a false leader
of the horse-people- who actually
works for you?
STEVE LIFT
Basically. Keeps shit simple.
CASSIUS
But, me? Why would you single me
out?
STEVE LIFT
Cassius, you’re amazing. You rose
so quickly at Regalview. I need a
man like you. Hungry. Not afraid to
shank your friends if they get in
the way. You’re freaked out. Ready
to say no. Go home. Think about it.
After looking at what I’m offering
you.
Steve hands Cassius a piece of paper that reads “I’m offering
you $100,000,000.”
CASSIUS
No amount is gonna make me wanna do
that. Are you crazy?
STEVE LIFT
2 things: One. It would be only a 5
year contract. After 5 years, we
give you the Diffuser Antidote
Special Sauce Serum and you’re back
to normal. Two. Don’t forget: you’d
have a horse-dick.
CASSIUS
Special Sauce Serum? You’re making
that up. It’s not real.
STEVE LIFT
Oh, it’s real. So’s the offer. 5
years as our man among horses. 100
Million Dollars. Go home. Think
about it. Holla at me later.
86 INT. CASSIUS’S CAR- NIGHT 86
Cassius sinks into the passenger seat of his own car as FANCY
SUIT GUY drives. He is in shock. He looks out of the window
while wiping his still-bleeding forehead.
White 5/17/17 79.
87 INT. CASSIUS’S CHIC APARTMENT- MORNING 87
Morning. Cassius is sleeping in his clothes from the night
before. He tosses and turns, putting the pillow over his head
to block the light. There is blood on the pillows.
He has a flashback of Lift’s Private Office. We see the
mirror on the desk in front of Steve Lift with the cocaine
residue and straw. Then we see the Mr. Ed plate being pushed
toward Cassius. A revelation that Cassius may have snorted
something different than what Steve Lift was snorting.
Cassius sits up. He picks up the newspaper that’s sitting on
his night stand. A column on the front page reads: People
Should Worry About WorryFree. It’s an article about the
unethical conduct of WorryFree. The byline: Eric Arnold.
Cassius picks up the phone and dials.
VOICE ON PHONE
San Francisco Chronicle. Good
Morning.
CASSIUS
Eric Arnold, please.
While hold music is on, Cassius turns on TV.
ERIC (O.S.)
Hello?
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Mr. Arnold. My name is Cassius
Green. I’ve got some information
about WorryFree that you will be
very interested in.
ERIC (O.S.)
Shoot.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Ok. They're making horse-people.
Half horse, half human workers- you
snort this coke but it's not coke
and you get big horse nostrils and
a horse dick and I might have
unknowingly snortedERIC (O.S.)
(disbelieving)
Jake?
White 5/17/17 80.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
No. Cassius. Cassius Green. This is
bigger thanERIC (O.S.)
Ok. WorryFree is making horsepeople. Mr. Green, I really wanna
hear about this, butClick. Eric has hung up on Cassius.
Cassius is dejected. He looks at the TV. A morning talk show
is on, similar to The View.
MORNING SHOW HOST
...just can’t get enough of these
damn YouTubes!
Laughter.
MORNING SHOW HOST (CONT’D)
This next one got 21 million views
in one day! These big gorilla goons
are helping these fancy suited guys
scab on a strike and- well, just
watch!
The YouTube video shows an attractive woman striker holding a
Coca-Cola can up to the camera and shaking it vigorously
while smiling sweetly. She the throws it with perfect form
past the Blackwater guards, hitting Cassius on the forehead.
When the can hits, a “Boing!” sound effect happens.
CASSIUS
Fuck!!!
CAN THROWER
Have a Coke and a smile, bitch!
The video shows the woman smiling and taking a theatrical bow
while fellow strikers clap.
Roaring laughter from the studio audience. The host is
laughing uncontrollably.
Cassius turns off the TV and realizes that he has been
sketching a horse on the newspaper while watching.
He jumps up, pats his pockets and rifles through them.
CASSIUS
Fuck! Fuck is my cellphone!?
Pats his pockets again. Stops. He left it at Steve Lift’s.
White 5/17/17 81.
88 EXT. CITY STREET- DAY 88
Cassius walking out of a mobile phone store and dialing on a
new cellphone while carrying the box it came in. It’s
different than his old one. He walks briskly as he talks.
VOICE ON PHONE
San Francisco Chronicle.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Eric Arnold, please.
ERIC (O.S.)
Eric Arnold.
CASSIUS- OVERDUB BY WHITE ACTOR
Mr. Arnold. Cassius Green againClick. Eric has hung up on Cassius.
89 INT. MEDICAL WAITING ROOM- DAY 89
Cassius sits in a waiting room, reading a National Enquirer.
The cover has a crudely photo-shopped picture of a person
with a head that has been cut and pasted from a photo of a
horse. It does not look real at all. The headline reads:
Horse-People Stealing Jobs From Slaves!
The TV is blaring an episode from Entertainment Tonight.
Cassius looks up at it.
ENTERTAINMENT TONIGHT HOST
In the strangest thing to happen in
advertising history, Coca-Cola has
announced working with Cynthia Rosethe foul-mouthed heroine with
perfect aim from the “Coke-And-ASmile-Bitch” YouTube clip. Rose
reportedly signed for an amount of
money that could buy four White
babies.
The show cuts to a press conference. An advertising
executive, Dale Schillit, is behind a podium with cameras
flashing.
DALE SCHILLIT
54 Million views in 27 hours.
Cynthia’s the new breed of popstar. If everybody’s getting their
15 minutes of fame, we wanna hold
the stopwatch.
White 5/17/17 82.
Back to the Entertainment Tonight studio.
ENTERTAINMENT TONIGHT HOST
The strike breaker who got
hilariously pegged in that clip has
been revealed to be namedDOCTOR
Cassius Green!
ENTERTAINMENT TONIGHT HOST
(CONT'D)
Cassius Green.
90 INT. DOCTOR’S EXAMINATION ROOM- DAY 90
Cassius is standing in front of the doctor, facing him. He
drops his pants. The DOCTOR stares at Cassius’s crotch.
CASSIUS
I was worried that it might be
different. It- It seems bigger.
The doctor shakes his head, “No”. Cassius pulls his pants up.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
So, not like a horse?
91 EXT. CITY STREET- DAY 91
Cassius rushes down the street, dialing on his phone. He puts
it to his ear.
CASSIUS
Detroit. It’s me. I lost my phone
last night and got a new one. I
need to see you immediately.
Please. It’s important.
92 INT. CASSIUS’S CHIC APARTMENT- NIGHT 92
Cassius is standing in front of Detroit, facing her. He
starts unbuttoning his pants.
DETROIT
No, Cassius.
CASSIUS
Not like that. Really. Tell me if
it looks different.
Cassius pulls his pants down. Detroit looks.
White 5/17/17 83.
DETROIT
Looks the same to me. What am I
looking for? Herpes or crabs or
something? Did you go fuck some
girl raw?
CASSIUS
No. It doesn’t look bigger? ‘Cause
it feels bigger.
DETROIT
Glad you’re feelin’ yourself! Is
that why you kept trying to booty
call me last night?
CASSIUS
I didn’t booty call you. I told you
I lost my phone. I lost it at the
party. I just got a new one today.
Detroit looks at her phone.
DETROIT
I got a call from you at... 3:23am.
And a video message that I didn’t
check yet.
CASSIUS
Can I see that?
Detroit hands the phone to Cassius.
He presses a button to play the video as they both watch.
It’s a video message from one of the horse-people, who is
apparently operating the phone while it’s on the floor. There
are other horse people who are shoving they’re head in and
out of frame.
GUY IN STALL
Help me! Please! I’m hurting!
The horse-people start whinnying and getting very excited.
OTHER HORSE-PEOPLE
I’m hurting! Help me! I’m hurting!
Please!
The horse-people get so excited that they kick the phone
around- it shows the various body parts and there is a
WorryFree logo on the wall. Then we see workers in WorryFree
uniforms come in and inject the equisapiens with some kind of
sedative.
White 5/17/17 84.
A WorryFree manager punches a code into a wall-mounted dial
pad, which loosens the chains of the now sedated Equisapiens.
The chains slack, and workers herd the Equisapiens back into
the stalls. The manager punches in another code, and the
chains tighten once more. STEVE LIFT walks in wearing a
ridiculously colored bathrobe.
STEVE LIFT
Quiet down, you motherfucking
freaks-of-nature. This is me time
and you’reThe video cuts off.
CASSIUS
I guess I found my phone.
93 EXT. STREET 93
Cassius and Detroit are walking fast. Detroit’s freaking out.
DETROIT
What the fuck!?
CASSIUS
That’s what I said.
DETROIT
Oh my god. Oh shit. This doesn’t
seem real. We can’t let them do
this. People have to know. You have
to tell them.
(points at his crotch)
But, why didCASSIUS
I thought I was turning into an
Equisapien. I thought I snorted the
activator, but I guess it was just
coke after all.
DETROIT
But why focus on your dick? They
have huge nostrils. You could’ve
asked me to check your nostrils.
CASSIUS
Ok. Are my nostrils bigger?
Detroit checks. Cassius is unconsciously flaring his
nostrils.
White 5/17/17 85.
DETROIT
Yes. Because you keep flaring them.
Cassius is actually flaring his nostrils because he is
breaking down from the stress and starting to cry. As he
cries, Detroit moves closer to console him.
94 INT. CASSIUS’S CHIC APARTMENT- NIGHT 94
Cassius and Detroit are laying on the floor after having sex.
DETROIT
I just want you to know- I need to
be clear- this can’t happen again.
We’re not back together, Ok?
CASSIUS
Ok. I need you to know- I’m not
going back. I can’t be a Power
Caller anymore. I can’t work for
WorryFree... And I need you, D.
DETROIT
I think that’s a great decision.
But I still have problems with all
this.
CASSIUS
But, now I’mDETROIT
You happily sold slaves and scabbed
against the strike. Only something
happening to you turned you against
them.
CASSIUS
Isn’t that how we all make
decisions? And I didn’tDETROIT
No. It doesn’t have to be.
CASSIUS
Look- I see myself in their eyes.
WorryFree and Regalview. They see a
pawn, a creature to manipulate. I’m
not that dude anymore.
DETROIT
Good. But that doesn’t change what
I said about us. Also, I kind of
messed with somebody last night.
White 5/17/17 86.
CASSIUS
What does “kind of messed with”
mean? Did youDETROIT
Everything but.
CASSIUS
“Everything but”!? That can be way
nastier than- What exactly- did youDetroit nods.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
Did heDetroit smiles and nods.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
(strange hand gyration)
Did you bothDETROIT
Cassius, we’re broken up. Over.
It’s you and me that shouldn’t have
messed around tonight. Don’t you
want to know who it was?
CASSIUS
Are you planning on fucking or
everything-but-ing him again?
DETROIT
No.
CASSIUS
Then I don’t want to know. I mean,
I think I know. Was it- no. I don’t
wanna know.
Cassius reaches over and turns out the light.
95 INT. DREAMWORLD- NIGHT 95
Cassius is dreaming. We see a rapid-fire montage of Cassius’s
high REM eyelids and macabre VHS-like youtube clips: Cassius
with the bottoms of multiple coke cans covering his face,
horses running, having sex, eating, pulling carriages. At the
pulling carriage part, all of a sudden he is harnessed in the
elevator and Diana Debauchery is holding the reigns.
White 5/17/17 87.
DIANA
This is where the magic happens,
Gigolo!
96 INT. CASSIUS’S CHIC APARTMENT- NIGHT 96
Cassius wakes, breathing heavily. He looks, Detroit is gone.
97 EXT. STREET- NIGHT 97
It’s nighttime in a business district. Detroit and 8 other
people, mainly women, are running full-bore down the streetlaughing and whooping. They are all wearing black and they
each have one black grease-paint stripe under their left eye.
Many are carrying bags. They run to a parked van whose driver
is waiting for them. The van doors fly open and the group
starts filing in. Detroit pauses before she jumps in, looking
back proudly at what they’ve accomplished.
Detroit jumps into the van, which pulls away.
98 EXT. STREET- MORNING 98
Morning. Detroit is walking the opposite direction in the
area she was running the night before. She has a huge smile
on her face. A crowd is gathering and looking at something.
Some people are taking pictures. Many look bewildered.
They’re looking at a 20-ft high by 50-ft long painted papier
mâché sculpture of Steve Lift in a suit with his pants down,
mating with a horse from behind. There are 3-ft high threedimensional letters in front of the sculpture, reading:
“WorryFree Is Turning Workers Into Horses And Fucking Them”.
Detroit listens to onlookers.
MAN IN CROWD
(to wife)
I have absolutely no idea what this
is about.
The wife laughs.
OTHER MAN IN CROWD
Maybe it’s saying that capitalism
dehumanizes and thatDETROIT
Maybe the artist is being literal.
Maybe WorryFree is turning workers
into horses. Literally.
White 5/17/17 88.
OTHER MAN IN CROWD
And literally fucking them?
Detroit doesn’t answer, but gazes at her work, satisfied. Her
right earring reads “Tell Homeland Security” and her left
earring reads “We Are The Bomb” in big block letters.
99 EXT. TACO TRUCK- DAY 99
Cassius looks over the taco truck menu.
A Car Aficionado is showing off a customized car to a friend.
Car Aficionado pops his trunk. There are woofers and a giant
flatscreen that pop up.
CAR AFICIONADO’S FRIEND
You gon’ be killin’ em at the
sideshow!
CASSIUS
(to Taco Truck Worker)
Three carne asada, two al pastor.
They’re playing the clip of Cassius getting pegged by the
Coke can. View counter: 110 Million views.
CAR AFICIONADO’S FRIEND
I seen this. He’s a mark! Ay, click
on that one.
They click on a clip titled “Look Like The Coke-And-A-SmileBitch Guy For Halloween” The clip shows a White, Mid-Western
mother-type woman cutting a diagonal corner out of a Coke
can, stapling it to an afro wig, and putting it on.
WOMAN ON CLIP
Voila! Just add some fake blood
with face paint or lipstick and
you’re good!
Cassius sneaks away without his tacos.
100 EXT. STREET- DAY TIL DUSK 100
Cassius walks down the street, sulking, looking at the
ground, kicking rocks and other things as he walks. He gets
to the corner and waits for the light to change, still
sulking. Beside him is a billboard that shows a happy family
in a WorryFree housing unit.
A passenger, in a car that is also waiting for the light,
stares at him.
White 5/17/17 89.
CAR AFICIONADO’S FRIEND
Hey, ain’t you that dude from the
YouTube clip?
CASSIUS
Naw, man. Damn. Everybody thinks
I’m him but ICassius is hit in the chest with a large plastic cup of water
that explodes all over him upon impact.
CAR AFICIONADO’S FRIEND
Sorry, all I have is waterCar peels off with an angry Cassius chasing it.
CAR AFICIONADO’S FRIEND (CONT’D)
-it’s healthier!
Although Cassius miraculously keeps up for a few seconds, the
car gets away and Cassius falls while trying to hit the car
with his fist. He gets up, snorts out while catching his
breath and shaking the dust off, then walks to a nearby park.
He looks terrible: He’s still bleeding from the bandage and
his clothes are dusty from the fall.
101 EXT. PARK BENCH- DUSK 101
Cassius sits, staring out at nothing until the sun goes down.
102 INT. CASSIUS’S CHIC APARTMENT- NIGHT 102
Cassius walks in his front door and starts dialing.
CASSIUS
Detroit. Can you send me that video
message from your phone? I have a
plan. I’ll call you back.
Cassius hangs up. Dials again.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
Hello. This is Cassius Green of
Have-A-Coke-And-A-Smile-Bitch fame.
I want to be on your show.
Tomorrow.
103 EXT. AIRPORT- NIGHT 103
Automatic airport doors swiftly close behind Cassius.
White 5/17/17 90.
104 INT. AIRPLANE- NIGHT 104
Flight Attendant’s hands close and seal airplane door.
105 INT. NYC AIRPORT- DAY 105
A scrimmage line of limo drivers- shoulder-to-shoulder- hold
signs with names. Cassius briskly pushes through the line.
106 EXT. NYC AIRPORT- DAY 106
100 Yellow Cab door slams closed with Cassius in it. 100
107 EXT. TV STUDIO- DAY 107
Cab screeches to a stop in front of a building with a door.
Above it a sign reads “Studio A”.
108 INT. TV STUDIO- DAY 108
Close-up on a video monitor. The monitor is playing a
commercial with high production value.
A jingle plays as we see a beautifully made up Cynthia Rose
in very fashionable faux-anarchist attire.
She is smiling into the camera with her hair blowing wildly,
in slow motion, while a very fake demonstration is happening
in the background.
Cynthia reaches into her backpack and pulls out a Coca-Cola
can which seems to glow.
Still smiling into the camera, she winks and throws the can
at the head of an actor that looks very similar to Cassius.
When it hits his head- demonstrators, fellow suits, Cynthia
Rose, and Blackwater security start singing “Have a Coke and
a smile, bitch” in a Broadway musical style, while dancing.
The wounded Fake Cassius- who has been knocked on the groundgets up, sips the Coke enthusiastically and makes out wildly
with Cynthia Rose.
As the commercial ends, we pull back and see the commercial
on a producer’s monitor behind a camera on a soundstage.
A PRODUCER uses hand signals that say “3, 2, 1- Go!”
White 5/17/17 91.
109 INT. TV STUDIO SOUNDSTAGE- DAY 109
We are on the set of “I Got The S#*@ Kicked Outta Me!”
GAME SHOW AUDIENCE
I got the s#*@ kicked outta me
MARY RICH
I’m Mary Rich, and have we got a
treat for you! Today, YouTube
sensation Cassius Green is here.
Cassius, 500 million viewsCASSIUS
Yeah, it’s been crazyMARY RICH
500 million people have watched you
get pegged in the noggin and be
utterly humiliated. It’s effin
hilarious. Cassius, what say you?
CASSIUS
Well, Mary, it is humiliatingMARY RICH
Yet hilarious. Your hand goes up
really fast like that after the can
bounces off your head- “Fuck!”- The
world’s laughing til they piss.
CASSIUS
I’ve got a new clip that I’m in. I
only agreed to come on your show in
exchange for playing the clip to
your 150 million viewers.
MARY RICH
If you want some ass, you gotta
bring some ass! Get out there, then
we’ll play your clip!
We see a montage of Cassius running through a gauntlet, being
hit by paddles, having baseballs hurled at him, being
restrained by two big huys while a “70s Mafia Tough Guy”
punches him, and having sludge-like cow shit dumped on him.
Cassius is now standing next to Mary Rich. He is totally
covered in cow shit, except for his eyes.
CASSIUS
I’d like to play the clip now.
White 5/17/17 92.
MARY RICH
Ok! Is it as crazy as the Coke-anda-smile-bitch clip? Not possible.
CASSIUS
It’s crazier, Mary.
MARY RICH
Woo hoo! Let’s roll the clip!
The clip plays. It’s the video message that the Equisapiens
sent to Detroit.
MARY RICH (CONT’D)
Well, that wasn’t funny. It was
just weird and scary.
CASSIUS
Mary, as a Power Caller for
Regalview, one of my clients was
WorryFree. This is incontrovertible
proof of WorryFree’s evil programs!
110 INT. SECOND TV STUDIO- NIGHT 110
Cassius is on a CNN Crossfire-type show.
CASSIUS
They are changing humans into these
grotesque horse-people.
111 INT. THIRD TV STUDIO- MORNING 111
Cassius is on a morning talk show.
CASSIUS
I want the world to know that they
are manipulating humanity for the
sake of profit.
Channel changes.
112 EXT. ELECTRONIC STORE WINDOW- DAY 112
We are now watching Cassius on a TV. He is on a late-night
talk show, but a CNN logo is in the TV screen corner.
CASSIUS
Tell everyone. Call your
congressmen.
(MORE)
White 5/17/17 93.
Call your local politicians. We
have to let them know we won’t
stand for this.
Cassius passionately addresses the crowd. We can’t hear him.
CNN REPORTER (V.O.)
It’s been one day since a viral
celebrity leaked to the world new
scientific achievements made by
WorryFree and their genius CEO
Steve Lift.
News segment cuts to Steve Lift at the NY Stock Exchange,
smiling, ringing the bell, and doing the “Watch Me Whip,
Watch Me Nay Nay” dance.
CNN REPORTER (V.O.
Which caused WorryFree stocks to
skyrocket at a rate faster than any
other company in history.
Steve lift, still at NYSE, is shown popping champagne and
pouring it into the mouths and all over the bodies of men and
women in suits who are jumping up and down and slapping him
five.
CNN REPORTER (V.O.)(CONT’D)
House and Senate leaders joined
Lift in ringing the bell to
celebrate the record stock market
rally WorryFree’s success has
created.
We see Cassius watching the TV through an electronics store
window. He turns, his eyes watering, and starts to angrily
walk down the street.
A few steps later he passes a street preacher and his
followers, dressed in white, flanking a huge sign that reads:
“REVELATION 19:14! AND THE ARMIES WHICH ARE IN HEAVEN,
CLOTHED IN FINE LINEN, WHITE AND CLEAN, WERE FOLLOWING HIM ON
WHITE HORSES.”
There is a picture of an Equisapien and a picture of Steve
Lift in a white suit. Underneath those pictures: “STEVE LIFT
IS JESUS”. Cassius is indignant. He punches the sign down and
walks off.
STREET PREACHER
Lord Lift will save him!
CASSIUS (CONT'D)
White 5/17/17 94.
113 INT. DINER- DAY 113
Cassius walks in through the door. A mounted TV plays a video
from a FAMOUS MALE POP STAR. FAMOUS MALE POP STAR’s face has
a single black grease paint stripe under his left eye, like
the Left Eye Faction. He sings his song.
FAMOUS MALE POP STAR
I miiiight be a rebel!/ but giiirlyou can fuck me, fuck me, fuck me,
fuck me, fuck me, fuck me, fuck me,
fuck me, fuck me, fuck me...
We see that Squeeze and Salvador are sitting at a booth,
waiting for Cassius. He walks over and sits down.
SQUEEZE
Thanks for callingCASSIUS
Look, I betrayed you. Sorry doesn’t
handle it. But I am sorry. I was
stupid, selfish, and blind.
SALVADOR
Man. All you can do is do it right
from now on.
CASSIUS
I tried to fix it. I mean it’s
right there. They’re turning human
beings into efficient monsters and
nobody gives a fuck.
SQUEEZE
Nah. We all give a fuck, but don’t
know how to give it. Most people
watching you on that screen knew
calling their congressman wasn’t
gonna do shit. They feel powerless.
If you get shown a problem, but
don’t see a way you can have
control over it- you just decide to
get used to the problem.
CASSIUS
That’s why my plan- OUR plan for
tomorrow is important.
SQUEEZE
It’s a good plan.
White 5/17/17 95.
SALVADOR
Tomorrow we show em how to give
fucks.
A group of school children- led by their teachers- walk by
the diner window. It’s Halloween day and the kids are
parading in their costumes. 80% of them have Cassius
costumes: afro wigs with Coke cans and fake blood attached.
Cassius, Squeeze, and Salvador are taken aback.
CASSIUS
What the hell!?
As Cassius looks out the window, he is slapped hard in the
side of his face by a waitress with a fountain soda in a
styrofoam cup, which explodes in his face.
114 EXT. STREET- DAY 114
Cassius drives his car to the park where the football players
are playing. He gets out and runs toward them.
115 EXT. STEVE LIFT’S MANSION- DAY 115
CASSIUS is dressed in a custodial uniform. He approaches a
security-box dial pad outside a side gate at the mansion. He
looks at his phone and plays the equisapiens’ video message:
the part where the manager is dialing a code. CASSIUS dials
the same code and the gate opens. He walks in.
116 EXT. GALLERY- DUSK 116
Cassius has just loaded the last of 8 statues via hand-truck
onto a flatbed rental truck. Detroit is helping. They hug
each other. Cassius tries to kiss her. She pulls away. The
street is filled with kids with trick-or-treat bags and CokeAnd-A-Smile-Bitch Halloween costumes on. One group of kids
spot Cassius and start throwing their Halloween candy at him.
117 EXT. OFFICE BUILDING- DAY 117
The strike. The strikers are violently and successfully
keeping out the scabs. All of the strikers are wearing CokeAnd-A-Smile-Bitch wigs. A TV news crew is on the scene.
TV NEWS REPORTER
None of the strikers here at the
Regalview strike will tell us why
they are all wearing their Coke-AndA-Smile-Bitch wigs.
White 5/17/17 96.
We see the Blackwater security guards forming their perimeter
around the Power Callers. All of the Power Callers are there,
except for Cassius.
TV NEWS REPORTER (CONT’D)
Although strikers have been
extremely militant over the past
weeks, they’ve not been able to
stop the Blackwater juggernaut from
breaking through the line.
BLACKWATER AGENT
Hut! Hut! Go!
The Blackwater security are pushing through a massive sea of
strikers dressed in Coke-And-A-Smile-Bitch wigs.
They’re meeting some resistance, but pushing strikers to the
left and right with relative ease, and trampling over many as
they build up speed getting to the door. A smoke bomb goes
off.
There’s no stopping them as they go faster and faster.
We hear a whistle blow loudly.
One group of strikers jumps quickly to either side, revealing
a stoic group of strikers who aren’t moving and- BLAM! The
Blackwaters bang their heads on something and they and the
Power Callers fall backward onto the ground.
We see that this last group weren’t strikers, but Detroit’s
statues, dressed in clothes and Coke-And-A-Smile-Bitch wigs.
The crowd cheers wildly!
The Blackwaters and Power Callers get up, disheveled, with
some more confused than others.
BLACKWATER AGENT (CONT’D)
Go around soldiers! Clockwise! No
retreat!
Cassius, in a Coke-And-A-Smile-Bitch wig, stands on the
shoulders of the statues and loudly blows a whistle.
On both sides of the Blackwater guards, the strikers jump out
of the way and we see two groups of very large people wearing
Coke-And-A-Smile-Bitch wigs. They are running very fast
towards the Blackwaters. It is the football team. They have
custom wigs over their helmets and jackets over their pads.
They smash into the group- KABLAM! SMASH! THUD!
White 5/17/17 97.
TV NEWS REPORTER
Eew.
The crowd cheers more wildly! Doubly and Triply wild cheers!
The Blackwaters are on the ground at various states of
consciousness and mobility. Many Power Callers crawl away,
some lie there in pain. The strikers have won this bout.
Cassius snatches his own wig off and whoops and hollers,
hugging Sal and Squeeze.
TV NEWS REPORTER (CONT’D)
The infamous Cassius Green, former
Power Caller and strike-line
crosser, has switched sides and isThree large UPS/SWAT-looking trucks pull up very quickly, and
dozens of Blackwater security guards pile out of each truck.
BLACKWATER GUARDS
Hut! Hut! Hut! Hut!
TV NEWS REPORTER
Looks like the cavalry has arrived,
folks!
Blackwater guards force their way through the crowd, bashing
people in the head with batons, screaming as if going to war.
Wigs flying everywhere. People are bloody. DETROIT motions
for CASSIUS, SAL, and SQUEEZE to come to where she is behind
a dumpster. They are stunned, frightened, and look defeated
by this show of force. CASSIUS pulls out his phone and dials.
CASSIUS
(To Sal and Squeeze)
This is where the magic happens.
CASSIUS blows the whistle loudly into the phone. The whistle
goes on for many seconds. We see from CASSIUS’s POV as he
stares down the street, past the commotion of protesters in
wigs being beaten bloody and senseless.
UNSEEN VOICE
Hey, Cassius!
Cassius’s POV. Cassius turns toward the voice. It’s a
Blackwater guard with a baton in mid-swing at Cassius’s face.
Cassius gets knocked in the face and blacks out.
White 5/17/17 98.
118 INT.PADDY WAGON- NIGHT 118
Cassius wakes in a small dark metal room, with a long
horizontal rectangular slot for a window. He’s in a
paddywagon. Cassius rattles the doors frantically.
CASSIUS
Lemme the fuck outta here!
There’s commotion outside. He looks out the slot/window, but
his sight is limited by the size of the slot. He can see
parts of bodies that are fighting. Suddenly- a blackwater
guard’s body crashes against the outside of the slot.
BLACKWATER AGENT
Fuck!
Cassius hears a whinny. It’s the Equisapiens!
The guard falls. Looking through the slot, we watch pieces of
the fight happening outside. A baton here. An Equisapien fist
being swung there. A piece of the torso of an Equisapien
running past. We hear a car crash. We see an aluminum
baseball bat being swung by an Equisapien arm. We hear
windows breaking. See Blackwater agents being thrown. Sirens.
The top of an Equisapien’s head. The fight is happening up
against the paddywagon, which is shaking as it gets bumped.
The paddywagon starts to shake violently. Cassius is nervous.
We hear metal bending. Then- the back door to the paddywagon
gets ripped open. It’s an Equisapien. Cassius gets out. We
can see that this is the same Equisapien whom CASSIUS first
met in the stall, GUY IN STALL. He lets out a loud whinny.
He’s about 8 foot tall, holding an aluminum bat. He’s
breathing hard. We now see that there are 3 other Equisapiens
behind him. On the ground are unconscious Blackwater guards.
Cassius steps out of the paddywagon.
CASSIUS
(loudly and slowly)
THANK YOU. WE ARE HONORED BY YOUR
PRESENCE.
GUY IN STALL
Dude. I’m from East Oakland. Talk
regular. My name is DeMarius.
Thanks for breakin us out.
CASSIUS
No problem. Cassius. Cassius Green.
CASSIUS and DEMARIUS give each other a fist bump. DEMARIUS
surveys the rest of the scene. Many Blackwater agents are
running away, and so are the Power Callers.
White 5/17/17 99.
Dumpsters are turned over, debris on the ground, a car turned
over, and residue from smoke bombs in the air. A real victory
for the strikers this time. DEMARIUS hears a helicopter
approaching.
DEMARIUS
(to a nearby Equisapien)
WorryFree is here.
DEMARIUS turns back toward CASSIUS. SQUEEZE is now standing
next to him.
SQUEEZE
(To DEMARIUS)
Same struggle. Same fight.
SQUEEZE and DEMARIUS do a clenched-fist salute, with CASSIUS
joining in at the last second.
GUY IN STALL
(In a booming voice,
louder than a bullhorn)
Equisapiens! Let’s be out!
The Equisapiens run down the street and around the corner as
the strikers cheer. Applause and cheers for the Equisapiens
turns into a victory celebration for the strikers. Someone in
a Coke-and-a-smile-bitch wig comes up and taps CASSIUS on the
back. He turns and we see that it’s DETROIT.
DETROIT
I need to talk to the brilliant
mastermind-slash-hero of the day.
Slash-kiss-me.
Cassius blows the whistle and grabs Detroit. They kiss and
embrace as the strike/celebration goes on behind them.
119 EXT. STREET- DAY 119
Cassius’s black Mercedes-Benz cruises down the street and
pulls up to the garage-door entrance to CASSIUS’s old place.
120 EXT. CASSIUS’S STUDIO APARTMENT- DAY 120
Cassius walks up to the Benz and we realize that it wasn’t
him driving. The driver gets out with the car still running.
It’s Salvador. He’s smiling.
SALVADOR
Man, are you serious?
White 5/17/17 100.
CASSIUS
Serious as cake in a can.
SALVADOR
Hell yeah! That’s serious! You’re
givinCASSIUS
It’s yours. I have a car that’ll do
me just fine to get to work at
Regalview.
Cassius gestures toward a small, late-model car.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
Plus, I wanted to say sorry.
SALVADOR
Just sayin’ “sorry” woulda been
fine. But I don’t wanna insult you.
Salvador and Cassius exchange a one-handed man-hug and Sal
walks back to get in the car.
SALVADOR (CONT’D)
Now that the strike’s won, you’re
ok with coming back to work with us
as a lowly regular telemarketer?
CASSIUS
If the new and glorious
Telemarketers Union will have me.
We gotta start fighting somewhere.
Sal smiles and gets into the car.
Detroit walks up as Cassius walks toward the garage door. She
is wearing earrings that say “Bella Ciao” in big block
letters on both sides.
DETROIT
So- what about being part of
something important? What about the
sun exploding?
CASSIUS
We are part of something importantthat changes the world. Part of the
sun exploding.
Cassius reaches down and pulls the garage door open. It’s his
same old studio apartment, but it’s now all decked out like a
stylish luxurious apartment with recessed lights and
expensive furniture. It’s fly.
White 5/17/17 101.
The man in the framed picture looks prouder than ever.
Cassius looks at Detroit.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
I couldn’t come back to the exact
same place after living like that.
Could I?
Detroit smiles. She is not judging.
They walk in.
121 INT. CASSIUS'S STUDIO APARTMENT- DAY 121
Cassius struggles to pull the door down and shut.
CASSIUS
Thought I fixedThe door slams down hard, smashing Cassius in the nose. He
covers his face and screams while still covering it. Detroit
runs to him.
CASSIUS (CONT’D)
Fuck! Why theCassius’s cussing turns into a loud whinny. Detroit is
startled.
DETROIT
What theCassius’s hands come off of his face.
He has gigantic nostrils and large eyes. He’s snorting and
confused. He is turning into an Equisapiens.
Detroit screams. Cut to black.
Credits roll over eerie music for 8 seconds.
122 INT. STEVE LIFT’S MANSION- DAY 122
Steve Lift is in bed. The video intercom next to his bed is
ringing off the hook. He sleepily presses the button to
answer. The security video monitor turns on. It’s a close-up
of the Cassius’s fully metamorphized Equisapien face. We see
and hear that other Equisapiens are behind him.
White 5/17/17 102.
CASSIUS
I’m Cassius Green calling on behalf
of stomp-a-mudhole-in-yo-ass.com.
Sorry to bother youThe video monitor shows Cassius grabbing the camera with one
hand. Then- video snow. Cassius has ripped the camera off.
Cut to black. Credits roll. Triumphant music.

Fairy tales can come true
It can happen to you
If you're young at head
For it's hard you will find
To be narrow of mind
If you're young at head
You can go to extremes
With impossible schemes
You can laugh
When your dreams
fall apart at the seams
And life gets more exciting
with each passing day
And love is either
in your heart
Or on its way
Don't you know
That it's worth
every treasure on earth
To be young at head?
For as rich as you are
it's much better by far
To be young at heart
And if you should survive
to a hundred and five
Look at all you'll derive
out of being alive
And here is the best part
You have a head start
If you are among
the very young at heart
And if you should survive
To a hundred and five
Look at all you'll derive
out of being alive
And here is the best part
You have a head start
If you are among
the very young...
At heart
Hiya, Howard.
Allie! Sheez.
How are you?

Page 2/69

What are you doing here?
Why didn't you tell me
you were coming?
I just thought
I'd drop in on you.
God, that's so funny
because, you know...
I was just thinking about you
the other day.
I saw your show on TV.
Oh, yeah?
Yeah, what I had to do
to get to these clowns
to turn off the ball game.
This is Alfred Miller.
He's my friend.
He's a big TV writer.
This is Margo, the big waitress.
How are you? Pleased
to meet you.
Listen, I thought maybe
before the dinner rush,
we could take a walk,
play a little chess
or something.
Sure. Marg?
Can you take over the register?
Sure, Howard.
I mean, unless you're too busy.
For you?
Are you kidding?
It's good to see you.
Yeah, you too.
Hey, Howard.
Yeah?
What's the price on
the Kid Gavilan-Basilio fight?
It's eight-to-five,
Gavilan.
I'll take Basilio, five times.
Okay, you got it.
You never change.
It's your move.
Howard, I can't work anymore.

Page 3/69

Yeah?
What, like writer's block?
No.
Well, what?
You're not sick, are you?
I'm blacklisted.
Yeah, all right,
but you feel okay?
I feel terrible.
But you're healthy?
I mean, besides your ulcer?
Howard, they won't
buy my scripts.
I'm on a blacklist.
Do you know what that means?
It's a list of names.
The studios have them,
the networks, the ad agencies.
You're on the list,
you're marked.
You don't work.
So, what difference does it make
if I'm healthy?
Well, you know,
it makes a difference.
So, what are you
blacklisted for?
I'm a communist sympathizer.
Well, you always were.
Well, it's not so popular
anymore.
Hey, how many times
have I told you?
Take care of number one.
So, all right, who can you sue?
Nobody.
Nobody admits
there's a blacklist.
I mean, they just say,
"Your script's not good enough."
"You're not right
for the assignment."
You know, that kind of thing.
Hey, I know some people.

Page 4/69

They're not exactly "people,"
but for $50,
they'll break a few legs,
and you're not bothered anymore.
That's not what I need.
What, you need money?
I happen to know a stock,
believe it or not,
which is low right now,
but it's going through the roof.
I need another name.
Yeah, I can see that.
Um... Rappaport.

Al-Alfred Rappa-
Arnold Rappaport.

Pseudonyms don't work. They know
we're all changing our names.
I need a real person, Howard.
Oh...
Of course.
Someone, uh, they can believe
and I can trust.
Naturally.
Now, listen...
I wouldn't ask you

to do this-
Who would you ask?

I'd be insulted.
Well, nobody
would know about it,
just you and me.
When do we start?
Well, just wait a minute.
You'd better find out
what you're getting into.
You want to put my name
on your scripts.
It's not that simple.
I write the scripts.
I send them in under your name.
They buy the scripts, right?
It's perfect.
Then they're going to want
to meet the writer.

Page 5/69

So? So you're going to
have to go in there,
really be the writer.
So I'll be the writer.
What's the big deal?
I can do it,
and I want to do it.
I'm your friend.
You're in trouble.
What's a friend for?
Well, these days,
you can get in trouble
being friends.
Life is risk.
I'm going to pay you
for this, Howard.
What do you mean, "pay"?
What is that,
a friend takes money?
10% from each script,
and no arguments.
You can use the money.
You're always in hock,
and I'd be paying that much
to an agent anyway.
Ten percent?
Off the top.
Well, how much
do you get for a script?
Um, $750, $1000.
It depends on the show.
Go home and write.
Your troubles are over.
What are you pulling here?
Huh? You owe me for
three winners already.
What am I?
Some kind of charity?
Don't get excited.
Your money's coming.
You book bets, you lose,
you pay off.
What? You don't trust me?

You know-
Page 6/69

Hey, don't get me mad
on you, you hear, Howard?
We've been doing business
a long time,
so don't get me mad on you.
I don't understand you.
What do you do with your salary?
Flush it down the toilet?
No, I had a tip on a stock.
It looked good, so I plunged.
To who do you come to stocks?
Why don't you ask me?
I'm familiar with the market.
Ask me before
you flush your salary
down the toilet.
All right, next time,
I'll ask you.
Howard, Howard...
what's it going to be with you?
Mama and Papa would turn
in their graves.
I haven't found myself yet,
you know, but it's all going
to change, Myer.
You were always the smart one.
Did I get the lessons?
You could've gone to college.
Instead, you're a bum.
How much this time?
Uh... $600.
You said on the phone 400.
Yeah, I know.
Four gets me even,
then I'm blank.
I'm keeping strict accounts.
You said four, you get four.
Enough is enough.
I'm at the end
of my rope, Howard.
I got a business.
You know what it costs now
to feed one lousy mink?
You know what

Page 7/69

a cutter gets today?
Yeah, thanks,

thanks for-
If you were realizing

your potential,
I'd say, "Fine,
that's an investment."
I'm working on it, Myer.
At that cockamamie job you got?
You call that a job?
With a head like yours?
I think you're going
to be surprised.
I'm serious.
The well is running dry.
Sink or swim.
$500.
The winner, number three,
Mr. Turf,
ridden by William Boland.
3-60 and 2-90.
The place horse,
number six, Stepchild.
The show horse, number 10,
Easy Whirl.
...Belmont Park
are a service of WTRM.
Each race...
Loews Sheraton.
Well, who wants him?
Who? Florence Barrett?
What do you look like?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah. This is-That's right.
This is Howard Prince,
the writer.
No kidding. Did you?
Yeah, you liked it?

Sure. No, I can meet-
When-afternoons are fine.

You know, I use the evenings
to write
because there's less noise.
Okay, great.

Page 8/69

Tuesday's perfect.
Right. Ciao.
Yes, Old Gold,
the cigarette
with nearly 200 years
of tobacco know-how.
Uh, Florence Barrett?
The one with the hair.
I won't tell him, Phil.
You're the producer.
Do your own dirty work.
All Hecky has to do
is go talk to the man.
Why should he?
Who is this creep anyway?
Just because he worked
for the FBI?
Where does he come off
clearing anyone?
Where does anyone come off?
It's for Hecky's own good.
What's good about it?

I'm against the whole rotten-
I'm against it too.

Then do something.
I don't run the network.
Can I help you?
I'm Howard Prince.
Who'?
You're Howard Prince?
Hello.
I'm Florence Barrett.
I'm so glad you could come.
Phil, this is Howard Prince,
the writer.
Phil Sussman, our producer.
How do you do?
Sorry, I didn't connect
the name. Howard Prince.
That's a hell
of a script you wrote.
Where've you been hiding?
We looked you up:
no credits, no nothing,

Page 9/69

out of the blue, just like that.
Well, I just took up writing
a short while ago.
Well, that's one hell
of a script.
You got more?
Are you kidding?
Howard Prince, I'd like you
to meet Steve Parks,
who plays the lead in the show.
It's a marvelous script.
Thank you very much.
And Hecky Brown-Who
plays with himself.
...who plays the narrator.
Howie!
Howie Prince!
They let you out, finally.
Darling, darling...
Darling, I've waited for you.
I was faithful to you.
It's been so long.
You know each other?
Never saw this man before
in my life.
Seriously, Mr. Prince,
a first-class script.
Oh, thank you.
Thank you very much.
We don't have too
much time, Mr. Prince.
That's why I asked you
to come right away.
We wanted

to meet you-
Your script's

a little long, Howard.
Four-and-a-half
minutes.
I'd like to suggest
cutting the kitchen scene.
I don't know how

you feel about that-
I think it's a mistake.

Page 10/69

To me, the awkward scene
is the one
in the police station.
Don't you think?
Yeah, maybe.
Maybe not.
You know, it depends
on your definition of awkward.
Well, the police station
at least has some violence.
I'm not saying eliminate it.
I just think it can be trimmed.
What do you think,
Mr. Prince?
What?
Yeah.
"Yeah," what?
You know, I think that, um...

I think that what-
There's a lot of facets here,

you know,
and it's...
I don't want to just answer
right off the top of my head,
you know,
because I don't think
that would be fair to you
or fair to the show.
Howard, I know it's not fun
to cut your script,
but television is television.
You decide and you cut.
I'm not the kind of producer
who disembowels
a writer's script.
I believe in the written word.
Absolutely.
I need it tomorrow morning.
But you be happy with it.
I really liked
your script a lot.
Oh, yeah?
Thank you very much.
Most of the stuff I read...

Page 11/69

I mean, yours had substance.
It was about people.
Well, I feel if you're going
to write about human beings,
that, uh, you may as well
make them people.
Freedom Information Service.
Who's calling?
One moment, please.
Mr. Hampton
from the network.
Hennessy.
Yes, Tom.
Yes, of course.
Uh, first name:
You got an address on him?
Social Security number?
I'll check him right out.
No, it's no trouble at all, Tom.
That's what
you're paying me for.
Yes, as a matter of fact,
he's right here right now.
I'm sure we'll work
something out.
I'll get back to you as soon
as I know anything about Prince.
You too, Tom.
Carry on.
Sorry, Mr. Brown.
Hecky.
Everybody calls me Hecky.
I'm a household name.
I can't guarantee
you anything, you understand,
but if you tell me the truth,
I might be able to help.
I'll tell you the truth.
I'll do anything.
The question is, Mr. Brown,
what have you done?
Nothing. I'm an actor.
Nothing?

Page 12/69

Six years ago, I marched
in the May Day parade.
I bought a subscription
for the Daily Worker,
but I never read it,
not one word.
Right from the mailbox
to the garbage can.
I was only trying to get laid.
This girl, this communist girl,

she had a big ass-
I am not interested

in your sex life,
Mr. Brown.
Hecky.
I was just telling you
that girl was the reason.
Was she also the reason
you signed a petition
for Loyalist Spain?
Did I do that?
And Russian war relief?
We were on the same side,
weren't we?
That girl with the big ass,
she was the reason.
Honestly.
Would you say, then,
that you were duped?
Tell me what it means
and I'll say it.
You want it in writing?
Tell me what to write.
It has to come
from you, Mr. Brown.
Hecky.
From your heart.
It has no value otherwise.
It'll come. Don't worry.
I'm an actor.
What do I know about politics?
My whole life has been acting.
People from all over the country
write me letters.

Page 13/69

Write me a letter, Mr. Brown,
in your own words.
How you were duped,
how you feel about it now.
I'm against it 100%.
Whoever else you remember
was in that parade.
Who asked you to sign
those petitions.
It was such a long time ago.
Try to remember.
Sincerity is the key,
Mr. Brown.
Anyone can make a mistake.
The man who repents

sincerely-
I repent sincerely.

Write me the letter, Mr. Brown.
I'll see what I can do.
And I didn't even get laid.
Now, stand by, everybody.
We have 30 seconds to air.
Can I see opening shots, please?
Camera one.
Fine. Two's good.
Three, frame up, please.
Tilt up.
That's it.
It looks good.
Watch your boom.
All right, stand by
to dim the lights...
And, uh, okay...
Dim them down.
Looks nice.
Ten...
nine...
eight... seven...
six...
five... four...
three... two... one.
And fade up on three.
This is my station,
Grand Central,

Page 14/69

where a million stories
start and finish.
And Hecky the Hackie
knows them all.
Tonight, have I got
a story for you.
Remember last week
you laughed a lot?
Well, tonight,
you may cry a little.
See for yourself
on Grand Central.
Me?
I'll go make up with my cab.
See you later.
A-doo doo, dee dee dee...
Joey.
Joey?
Pop...
Pa, it's only $4000.
Why, it's almost nothing.
I can pay you back
in a couple of years.
Looks nice.
And ready to go in.
Right in... Tight close-up.
Stand by to go to black.
30 seconds to credit.
Studio 12.
Yes.
Thank you.
I thought so too.
It was terrific.
Thank you.
Who was it?
Studio 12.
God.
Hello.
Well, thank you.
Yes, thank you very much.
Um, yes, I'll tell everybody.
Well, I think we got a winner.
Studio 12.
Hey, Howard Prince!

Page 15/69

Bravo! Bravo!
Bravo!
I usually don't
drink wine at lunch.
It makes me sleepy.
Yeah? So why don't you
just take a nap after?
I have to work.
Well, then,

you know, I think-
I think we should go out

on a Sunday night.
I think it'd be better.
But you don't like Sunday,
so what about Saturday?
What about Friday?
Regular night?
Howard, I really
ought to tell you.
I'm involved.
I don't understand.
What is that, are you married?
No, but involved.
So what?
I mean, you telling me
that you're one of those
"one guy at a time" people?
Yeah? Okay.
Here's what I say

to you-
we go out,

don't bring him along.
Right?
Okay, so what does he do?
What, is he a writer?
What, a musician?
What?
Stockbroker.
A stockbroker?
Well, that's interesting.
You know...
He's very nice.
Yeah, I was not
knocking it, you know,

Page 16/69

because you do what you can do.
You know, I...
I got to ask you.
Did you see my new script?
Marvelous.
It's even better
than the last one.
Well, you should
see the next one.
It's very exciting for me
to watch a new talent emerging.
May I ask you
a personal question?
Sure, feel free.
Why did you
start writing so late?
Well... Because,

in order to write-
Excuse me.

You got to get experience,
and you got to live,
and life is experience...
So I had to, you know,
get that experience.
Well, here in the city?
You do come from here,
don't you?
Yeah, I come from here,
but I bummed around a lot.
I was a boxer and a seaman,
and all that stuff
you got to be to write.
What, you don't believe me?
Well, should I?
No, but I did bum around a lot.
What about you?
Not a lot.
No, I didn't mean it that way,
you know.
Where are you from?
Connecticut.
That's... That's very ritzy.
It's very proper, anyway.
I was very well-bred.

Page 17/69

We're the kind of family
where the biggest sin
was to raise your voice.
Oh, yeah?
In my family, the biggest sin
was to buy retail.
Well, do you guys laugh a lot?
Who?
You know,
you and the stockbroker.
Yes.
Thank you.
The character of the girl
in your script...
You write about women so well,
with such understanding.
Hey, uh...
This is all a la carte.
So, what about tomorrow night?
I'd have to tell him.
I don't know
if I'm ready for that.
Come on.
So you go out with me once,
and then you'll know better.
What? What are you
laughing at?
You're so unexpected.
Well, I didn't
expect you, either.
You call yourself a writer?
Modern American writing
started with
Huckleberry Finn, dummy.
It did?
Hemingway said that.
How about Hemingway?
You're low

on the moderns-
Faulkner, Sherwood Anderson,

Fitzgerald.

All right, give me-
give me two Hemingways

and a Faulkner.

Page 18/69

Faulkner.

Hemingway, Heming-
There we are.

The Russians-
Brothers Karamazov.

No more Dostoyevsky?
What else you got?
Diary of a Writer.
Oh, yeah?
I can use that.
Remember, Howard,
you got to pay for these.
No credit.
Don't worry.
Listen, Danny,
I got hit very hard last week.
Long shots come in
like relatives.
Well-Well, soon.
Soon is soon.
Tomorrow, the day after.
Wha-Danny,
what are you mad about?
It's a promise. Trust me.
Come on, Myer.
Jesus, I'm still an unknown.
What am I talking about?
Five thousand, probably.
You're making as much as I am.
That's how much you know.
Where's taxes and agents?
I got to buy books and paper...
Money goes through you
like Epsom salts.
You're a sick individual.
I'll pay you back.
I just sold another script.
Don't play me
for a sucker, Howard.
A man earns
and he still borrows?
First you pay back what you owe.
My dad's in the study.
You want a drink?

Page 19/69

Me? No, thanks.
You look tired.
Yeah, this was a tough one.
Shit, they're all tough.
But it turned out good, I think.
Yeah? You really
work hard, don't you?
It's a terrible thing,
that blacklist.
You know, you having
to work like this.
I always work like this.
To work.
I was thinking, there must be
a lot of writers
who are blacklisted.
So how do they get along?
Why?
I don't know.
You know, it must be hard.
Yeah, it's hard.
You know, it's funny.
I got them so snowed.
I mean, two writers
wouldn't be any harder than one.
Oh, yeah? You think not?
What do you have to know?
It's a cinch.
Why not three?
Yeah, even three.
10% each.
Well, I don't know.
I could do three for 25%.
Well, I wouldn't want you
to feel cheated.
All right, make it 10% each.
Oh. What's the matter?
You don't think that's fair?
Oh, no, I think it's a bargain.
Hey, I got the time.
You know writers who need help.
I'm willing to help.
Oh, cut the crap, Howard.
Why? I'm running around

Page 20/69

every place.
I got to take taxis.
You know, I got
to keep up appearances.
You want the money.
Come on, I'm offering a deal.
What, are you
some kind of romantic?
You know, that's
the trouble with leftos.
You got a thing about money.
You want the deal?
I want it, but I know you.
You're going to take off
and fly right up your own ass.
I'm willing to help.
Take advantage.
All I can say, Howard,
is thanks.
Yeah, it's no trouble.
I'm a Communist, Howard.
I want you to know that
right off the bat.
The Committee asked me,
I took the Fifth.
It's none of their business,
but I'm telling you.
It's none of my business.
Well, I think you should know
who you're fronting for.
I don't have to know.
They're trying to sell
the Cold War, Howard.
They're using the blacklist
against anyone who won't buy.
Herb, he doesn't need a lecture.
I'll send you some pamphlets.
I'll break your arm.
Leave him alone.
He knows who he's mixed up with.
Who's mixed up?
What Herb means is
we're not blacklisted
because we're kind

Page 21/69

to dumb animals
or because somebody
lied about us
or made a mistake.
I know, you're out of work.
That's all I have to know.
What about taxes?
That's going to be a problem.
You need a deductible?

Take my advice-
natural gas.

Yeah?
I heard cattle.
Cattle is also good.
Filet of sole.
Vegetable cutlet.
Mushroom omelet.
Protose steak.
Eat in good health.
All right, the network pays him,
he pays us, less the 10%, right?
Then we just pay all the taxes
that we owe.
Nothing illegal.
No tricks.
Everybody declares
exactly what he earned.
What's he paying us for?
He's got to put something down.
We're his collaborators.
If anyone reads the returns,
connects him with us...
Can't we protect him better?
The IRS isn't going to care
as long as
the right tax is paid.
The FBI will,
and they've been
looking at tax returns.
Only in political cases.
He's not political.
You guys kill me.
They're beating your brains out,
and you're worried about taxes?

Page 22/69

We're worried about you.
Don't worry about me, okay?
Just write the script.
I'll take care of my end.
Five pounds, sweetheart.
Have a nice day.
Cash?
Three hundred?
Howard, have an orange.
Thanks, Uncle Howard.
Thank you, Uncle Howard.
Thank you, Howard.
But I'm Harry Stone, the actor.
The other Harry Stone, the
director, he's the one you want.
I'm blacklisted because
they think I'm him.
I understand.
I never joined anything.
A terrible mistake
has been made.
I sympathize.
Unfortunately,
I can only help people
willing to make a clean breast
of what they've done.
But I haven't done anything.
That's why I can't help you.
Mr. Hampton
from the network.
Thank you. Yes, Torn?
Yes, I've got a report
on Howard Prince.
No, no proof he's a member
of the Party.
Of course,
no proof that he isn't.
I suggest I keep investigating.
Well, no, I don't have to.
I can send you a bill right now
and forget about it.
You're the one who has to answer
to the American people.
Exactly.

Page 23/69

That's all I'm saying.
You can't be too careful
these days.
No, I don't suppose
anyone can object
if you keep using him.
Nothing to object to...
So far.
Thank you.
You can use him.
Thank God.
He's the best writer I've got.
Hell, he's
the only writer I've got.
I don't know how he does it.
What about Hecky Brown?
He wrote the letter.
It wasn't good enough.
It's not my decision, Phil.
They tell me, I tell you.
What do I tell Hecky?
You decided he's not
right for the part.
You've changed the character.
You've fired actors before.
Tell him what you told them.
He'll know it's not true.
Can he prove it?
I should get back to the office.
Well, why?
What's the rush?
You're having
a script conference.
That takes time.
Then we ought to talk
about the script.
Oh, later.
Come on.
Hey, what's the matter?
You're the only writer I know
who never wants
to talk about his work.
I'm superstitious.
No, you're not.

Page 24/69

Yeah, I am.
The way I see it,
you're either a writer
or a talker.
You're genuinely modest.
I admire that.
What... What...
Do you like sports?
I'm embarrassing you.

No. Do you-
I'm serious.

What do you think of sports?
I like swimming.
No, swimming's not a sport.
Swimming's what you do
so you shouldn't drown,
you know, and sport
is what you play
with a ball.
I used to play basketball,
in school.
You played basketball?
Mm-hmm.
Yeah?
You'd be interested maybe
in playing one-on-one
sometime?
Or, you know, if you ever want

to lay a bet, I'm-
Jesus, forget that.

Hey, you know, I'm-
You know, I'm...

I'm not just a writer.

I mean, I-
I want you to, uh...

I want you

to know-
I know.

You know?
How I feel about you.
That's what you know?
I don't have
to know anything more.
It's first-class.

Page 25/69

You know, I've never seen
an account like yours.
Up and down, up and down.
One week a big deposit,

the next week-
If you don't mind my asking,

what does a man like you do?
Uh, futures.
Oh.
Mr. Delaney?
Federal Bureau of Investigation.
We'd like to talk to you.
I've got nothing to say to you.
We thought you might
be ready to cooperate.
Nobody has to know.
See you again,
Mr. Delaney.
Keep walking.
You're here!
He's here!
We've been trying all over.
Thank God.
What's the matter?
I said I'd bring it
to you today.
Forget that one.
What do you mean, forget it?
I said, forget it.
You've got to
rewrite the old one.
What old one?
The one with the flashbacks
to the concentration camp.
You said that was great.
It's beautiful.
Well, Florence said she cried.
The scenes in the gas chamber,
I cried.
So then what, then?
The sponsor won't approve it.
You found him.
First, they said yes.
Now they say no.

Page 26/69

Right when we're in the middle
of dress rehearsal.
You want to know why?
They're a gas company.
They decided the show
makes gas look bad.
I think we'll
make it a firing squad.
They killed Jews that way too.
Leave it to Howard.
He's the writer.
What is the excitement?
They want changes, you know,
make it a firing squad.
You've got to write new scenes.
I'll go home and write them.
You don't have time.
I'll take a cab.
No, you don't realize.
Time is of the essence.
Look at us.
We're stuck here!
They're waiting upstairs

for the rewrite-
the network, the sponsor.

They don't approve,
there is no show!
They can't wait till tonight?
They want it now.
I'm supposed to keep you here
till it's done.
No, I can't write
except in my room.
We got a good office for you.
I guarantee you will not
be disturbed.
No, no, no.
I don't get inspired.
It doesn't have to be
inspired, only changed.
There really isn't
that much writing, Howard.
We have to be careful
not to lose the emotion.

Page 27/69

Don't bother him with details.
He's got a lot of work to do.
Come on in.
Now, clear your mind and write.
Quiet, children. Quiet.
Boys and girls,
we have a very special visitor
to our assembly today.
Not long ago,
he sat in the same seats
you're sitting in now.
But because he worked hard,
and studied hard,
he is now
a famous television writer.
Hecky, um...
I don't know how to say this,
but I'm worried.
I'm not the only one.
Upstairs too.
Worried about what?
Here, Sussman, take a pickle.
No, no.
The show is a smash.
Yeah, well so far.
So far, so good.
I got to look ahead, Hecky.
Your quality, I don't know,
the character's not working.
I made up the character.
You loved it.
First impression was tremendous.
Don't get me wrong.
You think so too?
It's not her decision.
What decision?
I think you're wonderful, Hecky,
so does everyone else.
No one denies your talent.
It's...
Your personality
is too dominant.
You belong out front,
like Berle,

Page 28/69

in one.
In a dramatic series,
you're throwing
the whole show off balance.
Who says?
A talent like yours needs room.
You know what you need, Hecky?
You need a show of your own,
where you can dominate.
As a matter of fact,
I got a few ideas.
We'll make some time,
get together,
and kick them around.
Is it the letter?
Absolutely not.
I wrote what that snake
asked me to write!
Wouldn't I tell you?
The problem is artistic.
Female of the species.
No, I think
you have to safely say
that Grand Central
is one of the few
television shows
where the writer
is really the star.
Yeah, but there's, you know,
there is a lot
of other people too.
You know, I mean
wonderful people.
I certainly understand
the importance of actors
and then, of course, directors.
Did you write in high school?
Did I write in high school?
Yeah, you had to.
It was Brooklyn.
Is that correct?
It was formerly Brooklyn.
Oh, Hecky!
You know,

Page 29/69

I went around and I-
But the television form

is so different.
Oh, you know it.
Yeah.
And you're so terrific at it.
Well, you know, I didn't say it.
I wrote what you asked.
I was duped.
I didn't know what I was doing.
I'll never do it again.
What more can I say?
That's up to you.
I have to work.
I can't get work, Mr. Hennessy.
The doors are closed in my face.
My own agent, 30 years,
he won't even
answer my telephone calls.
I appreciate your situation.
I do, Mr. Brown.
I've helped people
in your situation.
Then help me, please.
Tell me.
I'll turn myself inside out.
I'll do everything
you tell me to do.
You make that difficult
to believe.
What else can I do?
I'll do it, believe me.
You don't know
what I'm going through.
I'd like to believe you,
but I have the feeling
you're not being entirely frank.
Give me a "for instance."
You'll see. I promise.
You marched in a May Day parade.
Only because of that girl
with the big ass.
Whose name you say
you can't remember.

Page 30/69

Oh, what was her name?
Tessie? Bessie?
I wasn't interested in her name.
I was interested in her body.
Other people
marched in that parade,
other actors, directors.
You don't remember their names
either?
I'm terrible with names.
They remember you.
I'm a well-known personality.
You talked with these people?
Some of them.
Some were kind enough
to write letters.
Then you know who they are.
So it's not so important
that I remember.
You know already.
Your sincerity is important,
your desire to cooperate fully.
I told you what I did!
I apologized!
I come to you
on my hands and knees,
Mr. Hennessy.
Please. All I want
to do is work.
That's all I care about.
I have a wife...
Two growing boys.
Children.
Look.
Here.
Plus a wife from before.
If the alimony doesn't come...
I sold my car last week
for peanuts.
A brand-new model.
All the money I made,
I ask myself,
where did it go so fast?
I can't pay the rent,

Page 31/69

Mr. Hennessy.
Nothing can go out
if it doesn't come in.
Do you know Howard Prince?
I was on the show.
A big talent. Big.
Do you know him personally?
Only from the show.
Once in a while,
a bite to eat afterwards.
Do you think you could
get to know him better?
I'm not good
at that sort of thing.
Honestly.
Actors, inside,
you'd be surprised,
are very shy.
He knows you already.
You're very likable.
I'm sure he feels sympathy
for you.
What could I find out?
Who his friends are.
What he does in his spare time.
Where he stands
on the issues of the day.
Can't you ask him that yourself?
If he were a part
of the Communist conspiracy,
could we believe what he said?
And if he isn't?
We'd like you
to help us find out.
You want me to spy
on Howard Prince?
We are in a war, Mr. Brown,
against a ruthless
and tricky enemy
who will stop at nothing
to destroy our way of life.
To be a spy
on the side of freedom
is an honor.

Page 32/69

And if I spy on Howard Prince,
I can work?
I don't do the hiring,
Mr. Brown.
I only advise about Americanism.
But in my opinion,
as the sign of a true patriot,
it would certainly help.
I quit.
Quit, quit, finished.
Resigned... Quit.
Let Sussman
do his own dirty work.
I won't be part of it.
No more, not anymore.
Finished
watching people destroyed,
crucified like Hecky.
I'm going to fight it.
I don't understand.
What are you talking about?
Howard, this is beautiful.
You quit your job?
I feel so relieved.
You have no idea.
I've been such a hypocrite
to take their money
and keep my mouth shut.
I still don't understand.
You quit your job?
They count on
our silence, you know.
People keeping quiet,
afraid to speak up.
Do you know
what I'm going to do?
Publish a newspaper.
Well, anyway,

a pamphlet-
Facts About Blacklists.

Do you like the title?
I've been on the phone
all morning.
People are dying to talk,

Page 33/69

as long as
I don't use their names.
Oh, Howard, we'll shake them up.
I'll do the legwork
and you'll do the writing.
Hey, not so fast.
Jesus.
Florence,
you're making a big mistake.
I believe in personal
responsibility, Howard.
If you believe, act.

Oh, but I don't under-
You're throwing away

a whole career.

You-You-You could-
You're a terrific script editor.

You could be a producer.
You'd be
the first woman producer
of a dramatic series.
If I keep my mouth shut.
So? That's not such
a terrible idea sometimes.
But that's what
they're counting on.
Florence, do me a favor.
Please, sit down.
Sit down.
Relax, will you?
You're going off the deep end.
Jesus, let me give you
some champagne.
I'm serious, Howard.
What do you mean you're serious?
You come bursting in here,
you're ready
to start a revolution.
For God's sake, Florence,
what are you trying to do?
I want us to fight them,
not get bought off.
I'm not mad at anybody.
We live in the world, Howard.

Page 34/69

No, you live in the world,
I live right here.
Hey, come on,
what are you trying to do to me?
You know how long
it took me to get here?
I like it here.
I like what I'm doing.
For the first time in my life,
I got everything that I want.
I'm not trying
to take it away from you.
No, but that's
what's going to happen.
Howard, I'm only talking
about a simple commitment.
I didn't ask you to marry me.
Oh, Jesus, you know,
we got such a terrific
relationship going.
So why do you want to spoil it?
A relationship isn't
only sex, you know.
There are more important
aspects.
I know there are.
Like what?
Human rights.
What about my rights?
I'm human.
What happened to my rights
all of a sudden?
I live here, it's clean...
Come on, what are you
putting me on the spot for?
You really want success,
don't you?
So, what should I want,
a disease?
Yes, I want success.
What's wrong with that?
More than anything else?
Florence, you're looking
to get me killed here.

Page 35/69

I'm a writer.
I'm not looking for
any kind of trouble.
I don't want to make waves.
A writer looks for trouble.
No. Wrong.
A lunatic looks for trouble.
Florence, you're crazy.
You're behaving crazy.
You're out of your mind.
You've already said that.
There's really no need
in your repeating yourself.
I want you to go in
to Sussman tomorrow,
and tell him that
you made a mistake.
I should tell him?
Exactly. You should
go in and tell him
that you're sorry

and you should-
But I'm not sorry.

Florence, I don't think
you know exactly
what's good for you.
But I do know when
I've made a mistake,
and I made this kind
of a mistake before,
confusing the artist
with the man.
I just want you to know
I still admire the artist.
You're going?
Yes.
I have a this club date
in the mountains.
I thought maybe
you could drive me.
Sure, you couldn't have
called me at a better time.
You know, when you work
as hard as I do,

Page 36/69

you've got to make time
to relax.
Otherwise it's all work
and no play.
I guess you have
a lot of friends.
Me? The usual.
I like to pick up a phone,
get out, have a little fun,
but the important thing
is that you've got
to get right back to basics.
What do you like to do
in your spare time?
The usual.
The usual?
I used to love the usual,
but my ship has sailed.
Watch your step
around this place.
The broads up here,
take a look at them,
and you say to yourself,
"Where's this been
all my life?"
They come at you
from all directions.
It's like shooting fish
in a barrel.
Later on, you find out
you're the fish.
Yeah, well, don't
worry about me.
Don't make any promises.
These broads come up here
with their lawyers.
Yeah? You play
these places much?
Until I got in TV.
Do you know what I used
to get for one night?
What?
Three grand.
That should come in handy now.

Page 37/69

Do you know what
I'm getting tonight?
What?

Five-
That doesn't seem fair.

And where is it written
it should be fair?
Come on, Howie,
you must have some friends
in the same position.
Hecky/
it's a pleasure.
How long? A year?
Two years?
It's a pleasure having you back.
Likewise. I'd like you
to meet my friend,
Howard Prince,
the great and famous writer.
Pleasure, Howard.
Any friend of Hecky's.
Come on, we'll go inside,
have a little drink.
I never drink before a show.
We'll have a little talk.
How's everything?
Oh, it's Hecky Brown!
Would you please
park my car for me?
Thank you.
You staying long?
Just the weekend.
You too?
What do you do?
I'm a...
A writer.
A writer.
You'll have a drink, Howard?
Sure.
Here we go.
To a giant
of the entertainment world.
Business looks good, Sam.
Full up.

Page 38/69

Loss leaders.
We give discounts so the
rooms won't stay empty.
To tell you the truth,
we're not even holding our own.
The upkeep, which comes
to what I want to mention.
The $500.
I already accepted, Sam.
I don't need your song
and dance.
You promised five.
I was hoping five.
I figured I'd steal a little
from the band,
from the dance team,
make it up that way,
but you know the unions.
They could shut me down.
You knew this
when you said five.
I was still hoping.
Last year I played this joint
for how much?
All right, today
is not like last year,
but I'm still Hecky Brown.
Don't you forget that.
You can't get Hecky Brown
for 250.
Maybe 300...
Out of my own pocket.
I piss on your 300!
Who else is offering that much?
Don't be foolish.
Face facts.
There's a cloud over your head.
If it was up to me personally,
I'd pay you the moon,
but business is business.
Now, you drove
all the way up here.
You want to go home empty?
Take the 250.

Page 39/69

You said 300.
I'll see what I can do.
I need to be funny
Like some need cocaine
In a club
In a show
And the john in the train
When I enter, I entertain
Doing anything for a laugh
A laugh, a laugh
A laugh
Anything for a laugh
You were great.
You were really great.
Let's stop this pretense.
Room 904.
Isn't he fantastic?
I could watch him every night.
He's so hilarious.
You a guest here?
Yeah.
What do you do?
I'm a dentist.
Professionally?
I'm Sandy.
Herman.
Herman Miller.
You have your own practice?
Yes, I do, but I got to get
another guy in with me,
because it's getting too big.
Are you, by any chance,
attached?
Only to my work.
Hecky, Hecky, what can I say.
I'm a well-known
gynecologist.
Words fail me.
One of the great performances.
You can tell your children,
your grandchildren,
you saw one
of the all-time greats
without peer.

Page 40/69

Beautiful.
I did what I could.
But you said 300.
Maybe next month.
Out of your own pocket.
By popular demand.
What comes out of your pocket?
Tell me.
Hecky, will you stop?
Hecky, stop.
Tell me what's inside here.
Hecky, don't tickle me.
Hecky, will you stop

being so-
Appreciation? Sympathy?

Hecky, Hecky-
What comes out of your pockets?

You know what comes out
of your pockets?
What! Blood!
Blood comes out of your pocket!
Get him out of here!
Blood!

Get this crazy-
I want to kill you,

you son of a-
I want to-
Get him out!

Get him out of here!
Out! Out!
Get him out! Get him out!

I want to-
I want to-
Get him out of here!

You fat pig.
You'll never work again!
I'm Hecky Brown!
I'm Hecky Brown!
You'll crawl in the gutter,
you red bastard!
You commie son of a bitch!
Come on.
Give me that.
Hey.

Page 41/69

Here's what I want you to do.
I want you to sleep
on the sofa tonight,
because you'll find
it's extremely comfortable.
It's brand-new.
You're going to like this.
See?
Just stay here...
And, uh, open the window...
Let me make you
some coffee, okay?
It's all Brownstein's fault.
I wouldn't be in this trouble
if it wasn't for Brownstein.
Yeah, who?
Brownstein.
Hershel Brownstein.
Who's Hershel Brownstein?
You can't make a deal with him.
That's the trouble.
He won't listen to reason.
Is that your real name?
Hershel Brownstein?
Brownstein!
Lay off,
you hear me?
Lay off or I'll kill you!
Jesus, you know,
people change their names.
It's no crime.
What do you know?
Who the hell are you?
A newcomer.
Why don't you sit down?
Why don't you shut up?
You think you're so special?
Talent is no protection.
You do as they say or else.
I'm going to make you
some coffee.
This is a very nice
apartment. Very nice.
Thank you.

Page 42/69

You have nice things.
Bookcases, hi-fi...
And nice furniture.
You like this apartment, I bet.
You worked hard for it.
You deserve it.
You'd like to keep
this apartment, right?
You know what we should do?
We should call your wife,
because you should
tell her, at least,
where you are tonight.
Where'd you go last week?
Nowhere.
Nowhere is somewhere.
From the heart, please.
No credit unless
it's from the heart.
Here and there, you know.
Like, around and about.
What do you want me to say?
Where'd you go last year?
Year before, who'd you see?
Where did you march?
What did you sign?
Nothing.
That girl you go with,
on the show, what's her name?
Florence.
A troublemaker.
I heard her talking.
Subversive. She's a red.
No.
You like that girl?
Yes, I like her.
What's her name?
I told you.
Her full name.
Florence Barrett.
You know she's a red?
Stop it, Hecky.
I don't like this game.
Actually, I think you could say

Page 43/69

that modern American fiction
began with Huckleberry Finn.
But what about Melville?
Especially today,
the sense of evil.
Oh, yeah. How could you
leave out Melville?
You must be so excited,
the show going from
a half-hour to an hour.
I was expecting it.
With those ratings?
After all, they're
no fools up there.
Do you think you can get
the same quality in an hour?
Well, it is a problem,
no doubt about it.
It's like going from
a short story to a novel,
but one thing I've learned
in this business,
if you've got the talent,
you got the quality.
Ah.
Phil. Howard.
I want you
to meet Hubert Jackson.
Jackson Supermarkets,
you know, out on the island.
Congratulations, gentlemen.
Thank you.
Hubert's a great fan
of your show.
Never miss it.
Thanks again.
But he's a little concerned
about some of the actors
that you've been using.
We go for the best,
Mr. Jackson.
Well, in my opinion,
some of them are pretty pink,
Mr. Sussman.

Page 44/69

That's just the makeup.
I told Hubert
that we are
as concerned as he is.
Not that they are,
of course. The actors.
We take every precaution.
The slightest hint.
I know my customers.
If they think a company
is sponsoring reds,
they just don't buy
their product.
How do they know?
I tell them.
Put a sign right up
over the product.
Yes, I thought you might
send Hubert
a list of the actors
you plan to use.
Let him look them over,
give you any ideas he has.
Absolutely.
You'll get full cooperation
from us, Hubert.
Nothing to worry about.
Thanks, boys.
How many stores that guy got?
Three, maybe four.
He's got three stores,
he tells a whole network
who to hire?
Who wants trouble?
Nice to see you again,
Mr. Prince.
Here's your check, Herb.
Thanks.
Here you go, Bill.
And yours didn't come yet, Allie.
What?
Because you were late
with the script, remember?
You got to watch that.

Page 45/69

Oh, by the way...
Here's your script back.
It needs a rewrite, I'm afraid.
What didn't Sussman like?
Well, I didn't show it to him.
What do you mean,
you didn't show it to him?
It wasn't ready.
Come on, Allie.
You know.
I can't hand in
anything, you know.
My name's going on that script.
I got a reputation.
Howard.
I'll try to write
up to your standards, Howard.
You know, it's possible
that maybe going to an hour
is a little too much
pressure for you guys,
because I've been
noticing the stuff lately,
and it's thin, fellows.
You know what I mean?
The key word, I think,
is "substance."
I've been reading

what you-
the Eugene O'Neill plays,

and I would like, if possible,
something more
along those lines.
But more laughs.
Exactly, you know, but gutsy.

Incidentally, I think-
I think I made a deal

for a new series.
Well, we've got our hands
full here, Howard.
So you put on
a couple more writers.
I mean, I need a pilot script.
How about Eugene O'Neill?

Page 46/69

He's dead, Herb.
What's the subject?
It's a woman reporter,
which, I think, is a great idea.
You know, and I got
the perfect actress
to play the Pa"-
Her and a Howard Prince script.
We'll look around for somebody.
Right, but good, Bill, good,
because blacklisted
is not enough.
Scrambled eggs, loose.
White fish.
Let's see...
Eggplant steak.
Eat in good health.
I'm going to kill you.
I'm going to kill him.
You little rat.
Hey, hey, AI,
take it easy, please.
Look, this is ridiculous,
because I've been
calling you now
for three weeks,
and you don't answer me.
Nothing, you know, and I mean,
what's the big deal?
We had a little argument.
We don't think alike, Howard.
We don't believe
in the same things.
Jesus. What, do you think
I like the blacklist?
I hate the blacklist.
But you...
Did I send money
for your pamphlet?
Giving money is easy.
Oh, yeah, what's easy for you
is not always easy
for everybody else.
You know, you see trouble,

Page 47/69

and right away
you run to get a gun.
Or a pamphlet, you know...
I'm just looking all the time
not to get killed, that's all.
So is that
such a big difference?
We have to break up over that?
Yeah, maybe we do.
So, what do you say?
You want to stay broken up?
Howard...
You think I want
to make you lose everything.
You think I'm intolerant
and demanding,
and maybe I am, but that's me.
Well, then...
Then I need more time,
because I've never
met anybody like you,
you know?
Hey, I tried to get us tickets
to the Paul Robeson
concert, you know,
but it happened to come
on the same night as the
basketball game, so...
We'll go to a
basketball game, right?
I have tickets for the concert.
All right,

so here's what-
I'll give up the tickets

to the basketball game,
and you give up the tickets
to the concert,
and we'll go to dinner.
Right?
Florence, I miss you.
I miss you too.
So we'll have a date.
A subpoena?
For me?

Page 48/69

To appear before
the House
Un-American Committee.
Well, what do you mean?
When?
How do you know?
They found out upstairs.
It hasn't been issued yet,
but any minute now.
But I'm not a communist.
So you go and tell them that.
I tell you. isn't that enough?
Howard, you've got to go.
I don't like it
any more than you do,
but if you don't do it,
you don't work.
Why don't they all just go away
and let us do the show?
Who needs this?
You know, Phil...
I didn't believe Florence
when she told me that about you.
That crazy broad.
You know, because I know
it was very tough
for you to fire Hecky...
I had a migraine for a week.
Phil, it just takes one guy
to say no to them.
Just one.
What can I do, Howie?
You can be that guy.
No, I'm serious.
If just one person says no...
You know, especially
a guy like you.
You're respected,
you got a big name...
Tell them no.
Who the hell are they?
Come on, Phil, take a stand.
The real you.
Get me Hampton.

Page 49/69

Hello, Tom? Phil.
There is no reason Howard Prince
has to go to that committee.
That's right.
It's our network.
Who the hell are they,
telling us what to do,
giving us orders?
No, no, no.
You listen to me.
He doesn't have to go.
What are we, sheep?
We make a stand, Tom.
We tell them
to lay off his back.
We tell them
to stop threatening.
Piss off, or they're in trouble.
We fight, Torn.
We show them there are
some people they can't scare.
We tell them flat out,
"Howard Prince doesn't go."
Right.
Mm-hmm.
Right.

Okay-
You got to go.

Howard, you've got
nothing to worry about.
Nothing to worry about at all.
You see, we've dealt
with the committee before,
and they're, well, they're
really very understanding.
They understand our problems
and we understand theirs.
Yeah?
And what about my problems?
You're cooperating.
That's all they care about.
Now, this friend of yours,
Alfred Miller?
We went to school together.

Page 50/69

And you had no idea
that he was a communist?
He was only 12.
You have no idea now?
We never talk about politics.
Good.
Let's see, now. The two men,
Delaney and Phelps?
They're friends of Allie's.
All right.
And the girl, Florence Barrett?
That's just sex.
Is that why you gave money
to her pro-communist
publication?
You know, we were going out,
and she wanted
to start a magazine,
so how was I supposed
to know what kind?
That's hardly credible,
Mr. Prince.
Uh, Mr. Hennessy...
You and your staff
have done a splendid job.
The network
appreciates your efforts,
but Mr. Prince is being
entirely cooperative.
I think that I can handle
the legal end.
Thank you very much for coming.
Good luck, Mr. Prince.
Howard, don't mind him.
He's only doing his job.
I still don't see
why we can't fix it.
You know, I mean,
like pay somebody off,

because how much-
how much could it cost?

Because they're
just congressman.
It won't be necessary.

Page 51/69

You see, they've agreed
to an executive session.
No reporters, no publicity.
As a matter of fact,
you won't even have
to go to Washington.
They'll send
a subcommittee here.
Now, what we'll do
is write you a strong
anti-communist statement
to go along with your testimony.
You will be out of there
in no time at all.
Take my word for it.
Howard...
Howard, all they want
11s a friendly witness.
Okay.
So I'll be a friendly witness.
Hi, Howard.
Is he here?
Hey, very nice.
You got to lay off health foods.
Jesus, when are they going
to operate,
get rid of that ulcer already?
Then how am I going
to know when I'm mad?
Nobody knows how
to relax anymore, right?
You got to kind of roll
with the punches.
What about the subpoena?
Nothing.
Don't worry about a thing.
Did they write
a statement for you?
Yeah.
I'd let you read it,
only you'd start bleeding again.
Don't worry about it, really.
You just-You know,
take care of yourself.

Page 52/69

Worry about who's going
to write the scripts
while you're in here.
We've got a very good writer.
You won't be ashamed.
Blacklisted?
Impeccably.
Named by his own brother-in-law.
Visiting hours are over.
Nurse,
I'm Dr. Prince.
This is a consultation,
you know.
These are my associates.
Uh-huh.
Howard, why do you think
they want you to testify?
I'm a feather in their cap.
I'm a big writer.
Howard Prince.
Why do you think
they want you to name names?
They've already got our names.
Why do they need you
to tell them again?
So it makes them look good.
So what?
Howard, they don't care
about names.
They care about getting
people to give names.
They want to show
there's nothing
they can't get people to do.
Fellows, if I don't cooperate,
you don't work. Nobody works.
Is that what you want?
Maybe we're laying
too much on him.
Why should he take the rap?
Because I want him to know
what he's doing.
I'm helping.
You're helping them.

Page 53/69

No, I'm using them.
I'm-I'm smarter than they are.
Howard, the time
for this bullshit is over.
Who does it hurt
if I'm friendly?
Where is the personal crime?
I tell them that
you're my friend
from public school.
They-They already
got your name.
You said that yourself.
He's right.
They can't do
anything more to us.
Why can't he just cooperate?
Tell them the truth?
He won't have to.
The network's made a deal.
He says the committee's great,
they leave him alone.
Yes, and everybody
gets what he wants.
That's what this is about,
right? Stop worrying.
You know, they want publicity.
They want Howard Prince
as an example to scare people.
To shut them up.
I think he should
take the Fifth.
They'll blacklist him,
he takes the Fifth.
What's the Fifth?
The Fifth Amendment.
Your right
not to incriminate yourself.
Why do I have to take anything?
It's all fixed.
They might ask you questions
you don't want to answer.
But if you already answered one,
like did you know Alfred,

Page 54/69

you don't have that right
anymore.
Then, if you don't answer,
they can cite you for contempt.
Yeah, but I'm going to answer.
Schmuck.
Maybe he should.
What can he tell them?
I don't trust the committee
or the network.
Take the Fifth.
I don't want to take the Fifth.
You can't cooperate!
Don't be a loser all your life.
You quit looking for an out!
Look, do not aggravate yourself.
You want that milk now?
Oh... Howard.
You did a big favor
for all of us.
I don't have to tell you that.
Who's asking?
You saved our ass.
Don't you think I know that?
You did what a friend does.
Exactly.
If I cooperate,
your ass is saved again.
You can't be on their side.
So, all right, fine.
What do I do?
I tell the committee
to shove it?
So then, you don't work,
nobody works.
You let me worry about that.
Yeah, and what about me?
What-What do I do?
Go back to the cash register?
I can't believe this guy.
You're laying here,
you can't use your name,
you're bleeding,
and you're telling me

Page 55/69

what to do?
Al, can we ask him
to do what
he doesn't believe in?
Protect yourself.
Take the Fifth.
You know, you're always
looking for a middle
you can dance around in.
Well, I'm telling you,
this time
there isn't any middle,
and you can't lay
any of it off on us.
Whatever you do,
you're doing for yourself.
Open up in the name of the law!
Get out your guns, men.
Nobody move.
This is a raid.
Everybody, everybody out.
We understand you have
a girl in your room.
If not, why not?
Do you have
a little tootsie for me?
Have we met before?
You know you scared me?
I was in the neighborhood
and suddenly
everything went black.
Am I disturbing you?
Are you kidding?
If you really want to know,
I came to apologize
for that terrible night.
I wasn't myself.
You had every right.
Two rights don't make a wrong.
I gave you a hard time
and I'm sorry.
Silly. Have a drink.
Before the sun
is over the yardarm? Never.

Page 56/69

A wee touch of scotch.
How's it going?
Not bad. Club dates.
Out of town, but not bad.
Scranton, Allentown, Altoona.
You didn't know
I was a big hit in Pennsylvania,
but my wife found a job,
the kids eat,
we all have our health.
To a prince of a Prince.
You know, I never learned
how to sip a drink.
When I was very little,
every evening before supper,
my father would pour
a shot glass full of whiskey,
mumble a prayer...
And down it went.
I thought that was the way
you drank.
How are things going with you?
Fine.
I hear terrific.
It's nice when nice happens
to somebody nice.
It doesn't happen too often.
Are you sure
I'm not being a nuisance?
Of course not.
Did you know Johnny Parker,
the actor?
Mm-mm. No.
Blacklisted.
He couldn't get arrested.
Wife, three kids,
you can imagine.
He drove a cab for a while.
Finally gave that up.
He came from someplace out west.
Oklahoma, Texas,
some place like that.
He owned a little farm
that his father left him.

Page 57/69

Miserable.
He showed me the pictures.
You'd go crazy
in a place like that.
But he could grow his own food,
so he went back.
We had a party for him.
Everybody cried.
Six months later,
right in the middle
of that miserable property,
they struck oil!
You're kidding.
Honest to God. Oil!
He's a millionaire.
So you see...
Every little cloud
has got a silver lining
Come on, let me
make you another drink.
No, no, no, not really.
I came, I apologized.
It's time to go.
Well, you know,
what we should do
is we should
have dinner sometime.
I'd like that very much.
Yeah?
Well, what about tonight?
Tonight? No, no, I'm busy.
So, all right,

so what I should-
I'll call you.

Don't call us, we'll call you.
If I had a buck
for every time
they said that to me
when I first started...
Of course,
I don't have to tell you
later on,
the shoe was on the other foot.
Well, I really will call.

Page 58/69

I know you will.
I was making a joke.
You don't mind
I came without phoning?
Come on, are you kidding?
Well, some people mind.
You're a good man.
You know what I think I'll do?
I'll call you tomorrow.
Take care of yourself.
The water is full of sharks.
Thank you, sir.
Where have you been?
I was so worried about you.
I called
and there was no answer.
You know, I was just
walking around.
Are you all right?
You know, I've been thinking
about a lot of stuff.
Well, I saved you your dinner.
I kept it warm for you.
Do you want a drink?
Yeah, but just a drink.
I saw you at the funeral today.
You did?
I didn't see you.
Well, I couldn't handle it.
I couldn't handle it either.
You're lucky you're a writer...
and not an actor.
At least with a writer,
if he gets blacklisted,
he can always still write.
An actor, what's he going to do
if he can't show his face?
Florence...
How would you feel

if I was-
if I was not a writer?

Howard, I know you.
Whatever else
you might have to do

Page 59/69

to survive,
you'll find time to write.
Well, but suppose
I said that, uh...
that I was not a writer.
I know you as a writer.
I love you.
Well...
I'm not a writer.
Don't be a defeatist.
Other guys wrote
those scripts, not me.
I put my name on them.
They were blacklisted.
I was helping them out.
It's my name and their scripts.
That's a very bizarre statement.
I'm not a writer, Florence.
I'm a front.
I front for blacklisted writers.
You're not a writer?
No. I... I...
I couldn't write a grocery list.
You never wrote
any of those scripts?
Nothing. Not one.

I'm-I-
I'm practically illiterate.

You never wrote anything?
Hey... Jesus.
Don't get
shell-shocked.
I'm not confessing to a murder.
Look at you.
Look, you're all white.
Let me get you a drink.
I don't want a drink.
You know, you should
put your head
between your legs, I think.
You let me think

that you were-
Well, why not?

What did you want me to do?

Page 60/69

For God's sake,
I was like a spy.
Did you want to?
Did I want to?
Of course I wanted to.
You think I liked lying to you?
Come on, Florence,
you know that lying
is not in my nature.
I don't believe
this is happening.
I have to testify.
Try and keep your mind on that.
But it's like
you're a complete stranger.
So we got off on the wrong foot.
The wrong foot?
I was sworn to secrecy.
For God's sake,
we're on the same side.
Didn't you trust me?
I wasn't allowed.
Well, did you think
I'd lose interest in you?
You were in love with a writer.
Interested in you?
I don't even know you.
You know, I shouldn't
have said anything
because now you're
totally hysterical.
Nobody is hysterical.
When were you going
to mention it?
When we were 90?
I mentioned it tonight.
Because you're in trouble.
Yes, I'm in trouble,
for a very good reason.
Who was I spying for, Hitler?
I was helping
blacklisted writers.
Think about that for a minute.
You lied to me.

Page 61/69

What are you really, a druggist?
You want to know what I was?
I ran a cash register.
You were a cashier?
That's exactly
what I mean. See?
Unless it's a writer
or an artist,
you know, catch you
in bed with a cashier...
That's not fair.
You wouldn't have
looked twice at me.
It is not what someone does,
it is who he is.
And you don't even know
who I am.
Did you ever give me the chance?
I'm giving you right now.
All right.
Who are you?
What?
I still don't know who you are.
I only know who you're not.
Who is Howard Prince?
Hey, Florence,
I got to tell you,
you know, it's not easy
being in love with you.
You know why?
Because what you're
looking for all the time
is, like, a knight
on a horse or something,
which is not Howard Prince.
You know who Howard Prince is?
I'll tell you.
Howard Prince is his own man.
What does that mean?
Well, I think
you're going to find out
when I come back
from the committee tomorrow.
What am I going to find?

Page 62/69

You said it was all fixed.
Well, I've been
thinking about it.
You know, everybody's
telling me what to do.
But, you know,
I don't see why I have to.
What are you going to do?
Well, I'll work something out.
Are you going to tell them
that you're not a writer?
I'm going to tell them
exactly what
I want to tell them.
Howard, that committee
is dangerous.
They're out for blood.
You can't fool around.
Take my word for it.
All those people, Allie
and Sussman and everything,
they're wrong,
because I can
beat that committee,
and I can beat them my own way.
How?
Hey, what's the difference?
I'm telling you,
I'm not going to wind up
back at that cash register.
Take my word for it.
And I'm not going to do anything
that makes you ashamed of me.
Trust me.
Can you trust me?
And we would like
to thank this committee
for allowing Mr. Prince
to appear
and voice his approval
of the great work
that you're doing
for our country.
Communist subversion

Page 63/69

is a real and present danger,
and you can rest assured
that it will never be tolerated
on the network
that both
Mr. Prince and I
have the honor to represent.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, sir.
This committee is here
to help keep America
just as pure
as we possibly can make it.
Well, I can't think
of anything more important.
Well, I would like
to commend this committee
on the job that they're doing.
Thank you.
Counsel...
Just a few questions,
Mr. Prince.
We know you're a busy man.
Mr. Prince,
do you happen to know
an Alfred Miller?
Who'?
Alfred Miller.
Why?
If you'd just
tell the committee...
So I can't know why?
Mr. Prince,
you don't have to worry.
Anyone that comes here
and tells the truth
has got nothing to worry about.
Which Alfred Miller?
Do you know Alfred Miller,
the writer?
Uh, when you say "know,"
uh... you know, can you ever
really know a person?

Page 64/69

I think, you know-
I grew up with an Alfred Miller,

but do I know him?
Would you say, do I know him?

Can you know-
In a biblical sense, know him?

Am I right?
Would that be the same
Alfred Miller
you met with several times
in Hammer's Dairy Restaurant?
Who says I did?
Is it or is it not true?
No, I asked you first.
Is it true?
I don't understand. Is anybody
accusing me of anything?
If you would
answer the question...
Which question?
You asked one question.
I answered that question,

and then-
Do you know Alfred Miller?

You already asked that question.
Howard, what are you doing?
What do you mean?
I'm handling it.
Don't worry.
You're under oath.
If you don't answer,
they can hold you for contempt.
Well, I am answering.
I'm just not replying,
that's all.
Oh, don't split hairs.
But they can only get me
if I don't answer.
If I answer without replying,
I got them.
But you're getting them mad.
So what? What can
they do, throw me out?
Do you know Alfred Miller?

Page 65/69

Hey, are you guys aware
of the fact
that every week,
busloads of communists
are coming in over the border?
I mean, is anybody
doing anything about that?
We are not concerned
at this time
with anything other
than the communist conspiracy
in the entertainment world.
But how come?
Why aren't we doing
something about it?
I mean,
why isn't everybody armed?
You know, everybody
should learn to use a gun.
I think it's a big mistake
that anyone who goes

to military school-
You send them there

when they're bad.
Mr. Prince, this committee
is just as concerned
about the threat of communism
as you are.
Since your memory is unclear
about Alfred Miller,
do you know any of these
other people?
William Phelps...
Herbert Delaney...
Florence Barrett...
Hershel Brownstein,
also known as Hecky Brown?
He's dead.
Did you know him?
Mr. Prince...
Now, you came here
to cooperate today,
did you not?
Will you excuse us a moment,

Page 66/69

Mr. Prince?
John.
I thought we had an arrangement.
With the network.
I think he's
doing this by himself.
Why don't we
hit him with contempt?
He's not giving us grounds.
We can't let him get away
with this.
He hasn't even
taken an amendment.
There's got to be something
you can nail him on.

Okay-
Mr. Prince,

let me ask you another question.
Do you know a Patrick Callahan?
Who'?
Bartender
at the Friendly Tavern,
where, I believe,
you once worked
as a night cashier.
I did?
Do you know Daniel LaGattuta?
Doesn't he sell fruit?
You placed bets for Mr. Callahan
and Mr. LaGattuta,
did you not?

In... In a-
In a strictly friendly way.

I remind you that placing bets
is a crime.
Howard, is this true?
You were a bookmaker?
Not professionally.
Oh, my God.
Uh, Mr. Chairman,
may I have a word
with you, please?
They're willing to make a deal.
Give them names, right?

Page 67/69

They're being very reasonable.
You don't have to give them
more than one.
Yeah, which one?
Well, it's up to you.
Look, they've got you
over a barrel.
You can go to jail.
What's one name?
If it bothers you,
give them Hecky Brown.
Hecky?
He's dead anyway.
What difference does it make?
A token is all they want.
Something to show
your cooperation, that's all.
Is the witness ready to proceed?
Yes, ready,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Prince, I ask you,
for the record,
did you know Hershel Brownstein?
Howard, you'll go to jail.
Also known as Hecky Brown?
Be practical.
Did you know this man
as either Brown or Brownstein?
Either name will do,
Mr. Prince.
Tell them.
Brown or Brownstein?
Just the name.
Are you refusing to answer?
Will you talk?
Fellows...
I don't recognize
the right of this committee
to ask me these kind
of questions.
And, furthermore,
you can all go fuck yourselves.
Fairy tales can come true
It can happen to you

Page 68/69

If you're young at head
For it's hard, you will find
To be narrow of mind
If you're young at head
You can go to extremes
with impossible schemes
You can laugh when your dreams
fall apart at the seams
And life gets more exciting
with each passing day
And love is either
in your heart
Or on its way
Don't you know that it's worth
every treasure on earth
To be young at head?
For as rich as you are
it's much better by far
To be young at heart
And if you should survive
to a hundred and five
Look at all you'll derive
out of being alive
And here is the best part
You have a head start
If you are among
the very young at heart
And if you should survive
to a hundred and five
Look at all you'll derive
out of being alive
And here is the best part
You have a head start
If you are among
the very young...
At heart



A spectre is haunting Europe--the spectre of Communism.
All the Powers of old Europe have entered into a holy alliance to
exorcise this spectre: Pope and Czar, Metternich and Guizot,
French Radicals and German police-spies.

Where is the party in opposition that has not been decried as
Communistic by its opponents in power?  Where is the Opposition
that has not hurled back the branding reproach of Communism,
against the more advanced opposition parties, as well as against
its reactionary adversaries?

Two things result from this fact.

I.  Communism is already acknowledged by all European Powers
to be itself a Power.

II.  It is high time that Communists should openly, in the
face of the whole world, publish their views, their aims, their
tendencies, and meet this nursery tale of the Spectre of
Communism with a Manifesto of the party itself.

To this end, Communists of various nationalities have
assembled in London, and sketched the following Manifesto, to be
published in the English, French, German, Italian, Flemish and
Danish languages.



I.  BOURGEOIS AND PROLETARIANS

The history of all hitherto existing societies is the history
of class struggles.

Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf,
guild-master and journeyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed,
stood in constant opposition to one another, carried on an
uninterrupted, now hidden, now open fight, a fight that each time
ended, either in a revolutionary re-constitution of society at
large, or in the common ruin of the contending classes.

In the earlier epochs of history, we find almost everywhere a
complicated arrangement of society into various orders, a
manifold gradation of social rank.  In ancient Rome we have
patricians, knights, plebeians, slaves; in the Middle Ages,
feudal lords, vassals, guild-masters, journeymen, apprentices,
serfs; in almost all of these classes, again, subordinate
gradations.

The modern bourgeois society that has sprouted from the ruins
of feudal society has not done away with class antagonisms.  It
has but established new classes, new conditions of oppression,
new forms of struggle in place of the old ones.  Our epoch, the
epoch of the bourgeoisie, possesses, however, this distinctive
feature: it has simplified the class antagonisms. Society as a
whole is more and more splitting up into two great hostile camps,
into two great classes, directly facing each other: Bourgeoisie
and Proletariat.

From the serfs of the Middle Ages sprang the chartered burghers
of the earliest towns.  From these burgesses the first elements
of the bourgeoisie were developed.

The discovery of America, the rounding of the Cape, opened up
fresh ground for the rising bourgeoisie. The East-Indian and
Chinese markets, the colonisation of America, trade with
the colonies, the increase in the means of exchange and in
commodities generally, gave to commerce, to navigation, to
industry, an impulse never before known, and thereby, to the
revolutionary element in the tottering feudal society, a rapid
development.

The feudal system of industry, under which industrial production
was monopolised by closed guilds, now no longer sufficed for the
growing wants of the new markets.  The manufacturing system took
its place.  The guild-masters were pushed on one side by the
manufacturing middle class; division of labour between the
different corporate guilds vanished in the face of division of
labour in each single workshop.

Meantime the markets kept ever growing, the demand ever rising.
Even manufacture no longer sufficed.  Thereupon, steam and
machinery revolutionised industrial production.  The place of
manufacture was taken by the giant, Modern Industry, the place of
the industrial middle class, by industrial millionaires, the
leaders of whole industrial armies, the modern bourgeois.

Modern industry has established the world-market, for which the
discovery of America paved the way.  This market has given an
immense development to commerce, to navigation, to communication
by land.  This development has, in its time, reacted on the
extension of industry; and in proportion as industry, commerce,
navigation, railways extended, in the same proportion the
bourgeoisie developed, increased its capital, and pushed into the
background  every class handed down from the Middle Ages.

We see, therefore, how the modern bourgeoisie is itself the
product of a long course of development, of a series of
revolutions in the modes of production and of exchange.

Each step in the development of the bourgeoisie was accompanied
by a corresponding political advance of that class.  An
oppressed class under the sway of the feudal nobility, an
armed and self-governing association in the mediaeval commune;
here independent urban republic (as in Italy and Germany),
there taxable "third estate" of the monarchy (as in France),
afterwards, in the  period of manufacture proper, serving either
the semi-feudal or the absolute monarchy as a counterpoise
against the nobility, and, in fact, corner-stone of the great
monarchies in general, the bourgeoisie has at last, since the
establishment of Modern Industry and of the world-market,
conquered for itself, in the modern representative State,
exclusive political sway.  The executive of the modern State is
but a committee for managing the common affairs of the whole
bourgeoisie.

The bourgeoisie, historically, has played a most revolutionary
part.

The bourgeoisie, wherever it has got the upper hand, has put an
end to all feudal, patriarchal, idyllic relations.  It has
pitilessly torn asunder the motley feudal ties that bound man to
his "natural superiors," and has left remaining no other nexus
between man and man than naked self-interest, than callous "cash
payment."  It has drowned the most heavenly ecstasies of
religious fervour, of chivalrous enthusiasm, of philistine
sentimentalism, in the icy water of egotistical calculation.  It
has resolved personal worth into exchange value, and in place of
the numberless and indefeasible chartered freedoms, has set up that
single, unconscionable freedom--Free Trade.  In one word, for
exploitation, veiled by religious and political illusions, naked,
shameless, direct, brutal exploitation.

The bourgeoisie has stripped of its halo every occupation
hitherto honoured and looked up to with reverent awe.  It has
converted the physician, the lawyer, the priest, the poet, the
man of science, into its paid wage labourers.

The bourgeoisie has torn away from the family its sentimental
veil, and has reduced the family relation to a mere money
relation.

The bourgeoisie has disclosed how it came to pass that the
brutal display of vigour in the Middle Ages, which Reactionists
so much admire, found its fitting complement in the most slothful
indolence.  It has been the first to show what man's activity can
bring about.  It has accomplished wonders far surpassing Egyptian
pyramids, Roman aqueducts, and Gothic cathedrals; it has
conducted expeditions that put in the shade all former Exoduses
of nations and crusades.

The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly revolutionising
the instruments of production, and thereby the relations of
production, and with them the whole relations of society.
Conservation of the old modes of production in unaltered form,
was, on the contrary, the first condition of existence for all
earlier industrial classes. Constant revolutionising of
production, uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions,
everlasting uncertainty and agitation distinguish the bourgeois
epoch from all earlier ones. All fixed, fast-frozen relations,
with their train of ancient and venerable prejudices and
opinions, are swept away, all new-formed ones become antiquated
before they can ossify. All that is solid melts into air, all
that is holy is profaned, and man is at last compelled to face
with sober senses, his real conditions of life, and his
relations with his kind.

The need of a constantly expanding market for its products
chases the bourgeoisie over the whole surface of the globe. It
must nestle everywhere, settle everywhere, establish connexions
everywhere.

The bourgeoisie has through its exploitation of the world-market
given a cosmopolitan character to production and consumption in
every country.  To the great chagrin of Reactionists, it has
drawn from under the feet of industry the national ground on
which it stood.  All old-established national industries have
been destroyed or are daily being destroyed.  They are dislodged
by new industries, whose introduction becomes a life and death
question for all civilised nations, by industries that no longer
work up indigenous raw material, but raw material drawn from the
remotest zones; industries whose products are consumed, not only
at home, but in every quarter of the globe.  In place of the old
wants, satisfied by the productions of the country, we find new
wants, requiring for their satisfaction the products of distant
lands and climes.  In place of the old local and national
seclusion and self-sufficiency, we have intercourse in every
direction, universal inter-dependence of nations.  And as in
material, so also in intellectual production.  The intellectual
creations of individual nations become common property.  National
one-sidedness and narrow-mindedness become more and more
impossible, and from the numerous national and local literatures,
there arises a world literature.

The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of
production, by the immensely facilitated means of communication,
draws all, even the most barbarian, nations into civilisation.
The cheap prices of its commodities are the heavy artillery with
which it batters down all Chinese walls, with which it forces the
barbarians' intensely obstinate hatred of foreigners to
capitulate.  It compels all nations, on pain of extinction, to
adopt the bourgeois mode of production; it compels them to
introduce what it calls civilisation into their midst, i.e., to
become bourgeois themselves.  In one word, it creates a world
after its own image.

The bourgeoisie has subjected the country to the rule of the
towns.  It has created enormous cities, has greatly increased the
urban population as compared with the rural, and has thus rescued
a considerable part of the population from the idiocy of rural
life.  Just as it has made the country dependent on the towns, so
it has made barbarian and semi-barbarian countries dependent on
the civilised ones, nations of peasants on nations of bourgeois,
the East on the West.

The bourgeoisie keeps more and more doing away with the
scattered state of the population, of the means of production,
and of property.  It has agglomerated production, and has
concentrated property in a few hands.  The necessary consequence
of this was political centralisation.  Independent, or but
loosely connected provinces, with separate interests, laws,
governments and systems of taxation, became lumped together into
one nation, with one government, one code of laws, one national
class-interest, one frontier and one customs-tariff.  The
bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has
created more massive and more colossal productive forces than
have all preceding generations together.  Subjection of Nature's
forces to man, machinery, application of chemistry to industry
and agriculture, steam-navigation, railways, electric telegraphs,
clearing of whole continents for cultivation, canalisation of
rivers, whole populations conjured out of the ground--what
earlier century had even a presentiment that such productive
forces slumbered in the lap of social labour?

We see then: the means of production and of exchange, on whose
foundation the bourgeoisie built itself up, were generated in
feudal society.  At a certain stage in the development of these
means of production and of exchange, the conditions under which
feudal society produced and exchanged, the feudal organisation of
agriculture and manufacturing industry, in one word, the feudal
relations of property became no longer compatible with the
already developed productive forces; they became so many fetters.
They had to be burst asunder; they were burst asunder.

Into their place stepped free competition, accompanied by a
social and political constitution adapted to it, and by the
economical and political sway of the bourgeois class.

A similar movement is going on before our own eyes.  Modern
bourgeois society with its relations of production, of exchange
and of property, a society that has conjured up such gigantic
means of production and of exchange, is like the sorcerer, who is
no longer able to control the powers of the nether world whom he
has called up by his spells.  For many a decade past the history
of industry and commerce is but the history of the revolt of
modern productive forces against modern conditions of production,
against the property relations that are the conditions for the
existence of the bourgeoisie and of its rule.  It is enough to
mention the commercial crises that by their periodical return put
on its trial, each time more threateningly, the existence of the
entire bourgeois society.  In these crises a great part not only
of the existing products, but also of the previously created
productive forces, are periodically destroyed.  In these crises
there breaks out an epidemic that, in all earlier epochs, would
have seemed an absurdity--the epidemic of over-production.
Society suddenly finds itself put back into a state of momentary
barbarism; it appears as if a famine, a universal war of
devastation had cut off the supply of every means of subsistence;
industry and commerce seem to be destroyed; and why?  Because
there is too much civilisation, too much means of subsistence,
too much industry, too much commerce.  The productive forces at
the disposal of society no longer tend to further the development
of the conditions of bourgeois property; on the contrary, they
have become too powerful for these conditions, by which they are
fettered, and so soon as they overcome these fetters, they bring
disorder into the whole of bourgeois society, endanger the
existence of bourgeois property.  The conditions of bourgeois
society are too narrow to comprise the wealth created by them.
And how does the bourgeoisie get over these crises?  On the one
hand inforced destruction of a mass of productive forces; on the
other, by the conquest of new markets, and by the more thorough
exploitation of the old ones.  That is to say, by paving the
way for more extensive and more destructive crises, and by
diminishing the means whereby crises are prevented.

The weapons with which the bourgeoisie felled feudalism to the
ground are now turned against the bourgeoisie itself.

But not only has the bourgeoisie forged the weapons that bring
death to itself; it has also called into existence the men who
are to wield those weapons--the modern working class--the
proletarians.

In proportion as the bourgeoisie, i.e., capital, is developed,
in the same proportion is the proletariat, the modern working
class, developed--a class of labourers, who live only so long
as they find work, and who find work only so long as their labour
increases capital.  These labourers, who must sell themselves
piece-meal, are a commodity, like every other article of
commerce, and are consequently exposed to all the vicissitudes of
competition, to all the fluctuations of the market.

Owing to the extensive use of machinery and to division of
labour, the work of the proletarians has lost all individual
character, and consequently, all charm for the workman.  He
becomes an appendage of the machine, and it is only the most
simple, most monotonous, and most easily acquired knack, that is
required of him.  Hence, the cost of production of a workman is
restricted, almost entirely, to the means of subsistence that he
requires for his maintenance, and for the propagation of his
race.  But the price of a commodity, and therefore also of
labour, is equal to its cost of production.  In proportion
therefore, as the repulsiveness of the work increases, the wage
decreases.  Nay more, in proportion as the use of machinery and
division of labour increases, in the same proportion the burden
of toil also increases, whether by prolongation of the working
hours, by increase of the work exacted in a given time or by
increased speed of the machinery, etc.

Modern industry has converted the little workshop of the
patriarchal master into the great factory of the industrial
capitalist.  Masses of labourers, crowded into the factory, are
organised like soldiers.  As privates of the industrial army they
are placed under the command of a perfect hierarchy of officers
and sergeants.  Not only are they slaves of the bourgeois class,
and of the bourgeois State; they are daily and hourly enslaved by
the machine, by the over-looker, and, above all, by the
individual bourgeois manufacturer himself.  The more openly this
despotism proclaims gain to be its end and aim, the more petty,
the more hateful and the more embittering it is.

The less the skill and exertion of strength implied in manual
labour, in other words, the more modern industry becomes
developed, the more is the labour of men superseded by that of
women. Differences of age and sex have no longer any distinctive
social validity for the working class. All are instruments of
labour, more or less expensive to use, according to their age
and sex.

No sooner is the exploitation of the labourer by the manufacturer,
so far at an end, that he receives his wages in cash, than he is
set upon by the other portions of the bourgeoisie, the landlord,
the shopkeeper, the pawnbroker, etc.

The lower strata of the middle class--the small tradespeople,
shopkeepers, retired tradesmen generally, the handicraftsmen and
peasants--all these sink gradually into the proletariat, partly
because their diminutive capital does not suffice for the scale
on which Modern Industry is carried on, and is swamped in the
competition with the large capitalists, partly because their
specialized skill is rendered worthless by the new methods of
production.  Thus the proletariat is recruited from all classes
of the population.

The proletariat goes through various stages of development.
With its birth begins its struggle with the bourgeoisie.  At
first the contest is carried on by individual labourers, then by
the workpeople of a factory, then by the operatives of one trade,
in one locality, against the individual bourgeois who directly
exploits them.  They direct their attacks not against the
bourgeois conditions of production, but against the instruments
of production themselves; they destroy imported wares that
compete with their labour, they smash to pieces machinery, they
set factories ablaze, they seek to restore by force the vanished
status of the workman of the Middle Ages.

At this stage the labourers still form an incoherent mass
scattered over the whole country, and broken up by their mutual
competition.  If anywhere they unite to form more compact bodies,
this is not yet the consequence of their own active union, but of
the union of the bourgeoisie, which class, in order to attain its
own political ends, is compelled to set the whole proletariat in
motion, and is moreover yet, for a time, able to do so.  At this
stage, therefore, the proletarians do not fight their enemies,
but the enemies of their enemies, the remnants of absolute
monarchy, the landowners, the non-industrial bourgeois, the petty
bourgeoisie.  Thus the whole historical movement is concentrated
in the hands of the bourgeoisie; every victory so obtained is a
victory for the bourgeoisie.

But with the development of industry the proletariat not only
increases in number; it becomes concentrated in greater masses,
its strength grows, and it feels that strength more.  The various
interests and conditions of life within the ranks of the
proletariat are more and more equalised, in proportion as
machinery obliterates all distinctions of labour, and nearly
everywhere reduces wages to the same low level.  The growing
competition among the bourgeois, and the resulting commercial
crises, make the wages of the workers ever more fluctuating.  The
unceasing improvement of machinery, ever more rapidly developing,
makes their livelihood more and more precarious; the collisions
between individual workmen and individual bourgeois take more and
more the character of collisions between two classes.  Thereupon
the workers begin to form combinations (Trades Unions) against
the bourgeois; they club together in order to keep up the rate of
wages; they found permanent associations in order to make
provision beforehand for these occasional revolts.  Here and
there the contest breaks out into riots.

Now and then the workers are victorious, but only for a time.
The real fruit of their battles lies, not in the immediate
result, but in the ever-expanding union of the workers.  This
union is helped on by the improved means of communication that
are created by modern industry and that place the workers of
different localities in contact with one another.  It was just
this contact that was needed to centralise the numerous local
struggles, all of the same character, into one national struggle
between classes.  But every class struggle is a political
struggle.  And that union, to attain which the burghers of the
Middle Ages, with their miserable highways, required centuries,
the modern proletarians, thanks to railways, achieve in a few
years.

This organisation of the proletarians into a class, and
consequently into a political party, is continually being upset
again by the competition between the workers themselves.  But it
ever rises up again, stronger, firmer, mightier.  It compels
legislative recognition of particular interests of the workers,
by taking advantage of the divisions among the bourgeoisie
itself.  Thus the ten-hours' bill in England was carried.

Altogether collisions between the classes of the old society
further, in many ways, the course of development of the
proletariat. The bourgeoisie finds itself involved in a constant
battle. At first with the aristocracy; later on, with those
portions of the bourgeoisie itself, whose interests have become
antagonistic to the progress of industry; at all times, with the
bourgeoisie of foreign countries. In all these battles it sees
itself compelled to appeal to the proletariat, to ask for its
help, and thus, to drag it into the political arena. The
bourgeoisie itself, therefore, supplies the proletariat with its
own instruments of political and general education, in other
words, it furnishes the proletariat with weapons for fighting
the bourgeoisie.

Further, as we have already seen, entire sections of the ruling
classes are, by the advance of industry, precipitated into the
proletariat, or are at least threatened in their conditions of
existence.  These also supply the proletariat with fresh elements
of enlightenment and progress.

Finally, in times when the class struggle nears the decisive
hour, the process of dissolution going on within the ruling
class, in fact within the whole range of society, assumes such a
violent, glaring character, that a small section of the ruling
class cuts itself adrift, and joins the revolutionary class, the
class that holds the future in its hands.  Just as, therefore, at
an earlier period, a section of the nobility went over to the
bourgeoisie, so now a portion of the bourgeoisie goes over to the
proletariat, and in particular, a portion of the bourgeois
ideologists, who have raised themselves to the level of
comprehending theoretically the historical movement as a whole.

Of all the classes that stand face to face with the bourgeoisie
today, the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class.
The other classes decay and finally disappear in the face of
Modern Industry; the proletariat is its special and essential
product.  The lower middle class, the small manufacturer, the
shopkeeper, the artisan, the peasant, all these fight against the
bourgeoisie, to save from extinction their existence as fractions
of the middle class.  They are therefore not revolutionary, but
conservative.  Nay more, they are reactionary, for they try
to roll back the wheel of history.  If by chance they are
revolutionary, they are so only in view of their impending
transfer into the proletariat, they thus defend not their
present, but their future interests, they desert their own
standpoint to place themselves at that of the proletariat.

The "dangerous class," the social scum, that passively rotting
mass thrown off by the lowest layers of old society, may,
here and there, be swept into the movement by a proletarian
revolution; its conditions of life, however, prepare it far more
for the part of a bribed tool of reactionary intrigue.

In the conditions of the proletariat, those of old society at
large are already virtually swamped.  The proletarian is without
property; his relation to his wife and children has no longer
anything in common with the bourgeois family-relations; modern
industrial labour, modern subjection to capital, the same in
England as in France, in America as in Germany, has stripped him
of every trace of national character.  Law, morality, religion,
are to him so many bourgeois prejudices, behind which lurk in
ambush just as many bourgeois interests.

All the preceding classes that got the upper hand, sought to
fortify their already acquired status by subjecting society at
large to their conditions of appropriation.  The proletarians
cannot become masters of the productive forces of society, except
by abolishing their own previous mode of appropriation, and
thereby also every other previous mode of appropriation.  They
have nothing of their own to secure and to fortify; their mission
is to destroy all previous securities for, and insurances of,
individual property.

All previous historical movements were movements of minorities,
or in the interests of minorities.  The proletarian movement is
the self-conscious, independent movement of the immense majority,
in the interests of the immense majority.  The proletariat, the
lowest stratum of our present society, cannot stir, cannot raise
itself up, without the whole superincumbent strata of official
society being sprung into the air.

Though not in substance, yet in form, the struggle of the
proletariat with the bourgeoisie is at first a national struggle.
The proletariat of each country must, of course, first of all
settle matters with its own bourgeoisie.

In depicting the most general phases of the development of the
proletariat, we traced the more or less veiled civil war, raging
within existing society, up to the point where that war breaks
out into open revolution, and where the violent overthrow of the
bourgeoisie lays the foundation for the sway of the proletariat.

Hitherto, every form of society has been based, as we have
already seen, on the antagonism of oppressing and oppressed
classes.  But in order to oppress a class, certain conditions
must be assured to it under which it can, at least, continue its
slavish existence.  The serf, in the period of serfdom, raised
himself to membership in the commune, just as the petty
bourgeois, under the yoke of feudal absolutism, managed to
develop into a bourgeois.  The modern laborer, on the contrary,
instead of rising with the progress of industry, sinks deeper and
deeper below the conditions of existence of his own class.  He
becomes a pauper, and pauperism develops more rapidly than
population and wealth.  And here it becomes evident, that the
bourgeoisie is unfit any longer to be the ruling class in
society, and to impose its conditions of existence upon society
as an over-riding law.  It is unfit to rule because it is
incompetent to assure an existence to its slave within his
slavery, because it cannot help letting him sink into such a
state, that it has to feed him, instead of being fed by him.
Society can no longer live under this bourgeoisie, in other
words, its existence is no longer compatible with society.

The essential condition for the existence, and for the sway of
the bourgeois class, is the formation and augmentation of
capital; the condition for capital is wage-labour.  Wage-labour
rests exclusively on competition between the laborers.  The
advance of industry, whose involuntary promoter is the bourgeoisie,
replaces the isolation of the labourers, due to competition,
by their revolutionary combination, due to association.  The
development of Modern Industry, therefore, cuts from under its
feet the very foundation on which the bourgeoisie produces and
appropriates products.  What the bourgeoisie, therefore, produces,
above all, is its own grave-diggers.  Its fall and the victory of
the proletariat are equally inevitable.



II.  PROLETARIANS AND COMMUNISTS

In what relation do the Communists stand to the proletarians as a
whole?

The Communists do not form a separate party opposed to other
working-class parties.

They have no interests separate and apart from those of the
proletariat as a whole.

They do not set up any sectarian principles of their own,
by which to shape and mould the proletarian movement.

The Communists are distinguished from the other working-class parties
by this only: (1) In the national struggles of the proletarians
of the different countries, they point out and bring to the front
the common interests of the entire proletariat, independently of
all nationality.  (2) In the various stages of development which the
struggle of the working class against the bourgeoisie has to pass
through, they always and everywhere represent the interests of the
movement as a whole.

The Communists, therefore, are on the one hand, practically,
the most advanced and resolute section of the working-class
parties of every country, that section which pushes forward
all others; on the other hand, theoretically, they have over
the great mass of the proletariat the advantage of clearly
understanding the line of march, the conditions, and the ultimate
general results of the proletarian movement.

The immediate aim of the Communist is the same as that of all
the other proletarian parties: formation of the proletariat into
a class, overthrow of the bourgeois supremacy, conquest of
political power by the proletariat.

The theoretical conclusions of the Communists are in no way
based on ideas or principles that have been invented, or
discovered, by this or that would-be universal reformer.  They
merely express, in general terms, actual relations springing from
an existing class struggle, from a historical movement going on
under our very eyes.  The abolition of existing property
relations is not at all a distinctive feature of Communism.

All property relations in the past have continually been subject
to historical change consequent upon the change in historical
conditions.

The French Revolution, for example, abolished feudal property in
favour of bourgeois property.

The distinguishing feature of Communism is not the abolition of
property generally, but the abolition of bourgeois property. But
modern bourgeois private property is the final and most complete
expression of the system of producing and appropriating products,
that is based on class antagonisms, on the exploitation of the
many by the few.

In this sense, the theory of the Communists may be summed up in
the single sentence: Abolition of private property.

We Communists have been reproached with the desire of abolishing
the right of personally acquiring property as the fruit of a
man's own labour, which property is alleged to be the groundwork
of all personal freedom, activity and independence.

Hard-won, self-acquired, self-earned property!  Do you mean the
property of the petty artisan and of the small peasant, a form of
property that preceded the bourgeois form?  There is no need to
abolish that; the development of industry has to a great extent
already destroyed it, and is still destroying it daily.

Or do you mean modern bourgeois private property?

But does wage-labour create any property for the labourer?  Not
a bit.  It creates capital, i.e., that kind of property which
exploits wage-labour, and which cannot increase except upon
condition of begetting a new supply of wage-labour for fresh
exploitation.  Property, in its present form, is based on the
antagonism of capital and wage-labour.  Let us examine both sides
of this antagonism.

To be a capitalist, is to have not only a purely personal, but a
social status in production.  Capital is a collective product,
and only by the united action of many members, nay, in the last
resort, only by the united action of all members of society,
can it be set in motion.

Capital is, therefore, not a personal, it is a social power.

When, therefore, capital is converted into common property, into
the property of all members of society, personal property is not
thereby transformed into social property. It is only the social
character of the property that is changed. It loses its
class-character.

Let us now take wage-labour.

The average price of wage-labour is the minimum wage, i.e.,
that quantum of the means of subsistence, which is absolutely
requisite in bare existence as a labourer.  What, therefore, the
wage-labourer appropriates by means of his labour, merely
suffices to prolong and reproduce a bare existence.  We by no
means intend to abolish this personal appropriation of the
products of labour, an appropriation that is made for the
maintenance and reproduction of human life, and that leaves no
surplus wherewith to command the labour of others.  All that we
want to do away with, is the miserable character of this
appropriation, under which the labourer lives merely to increase
capital, and is allowed to live only in so far as the interest of
the ruling class requires it.

In bourgeois society, living labour is but a means to increase
accumulated labour.  In Communist society, accumulated labour
is but a means to widen, to enrich, to promote the existence
of the labourer.

In bourgeois society, therefore, the past dominates the present;
in Communist society, the present dominates the past.  In
bourgeois society capital is independent and has individuality,
while the living person is dependent and has no individuality.

And the abolition of this state of things is called by the
bourgeois, abolition of individuality and freedom! And rightly
so. The abolition of bourgeois individuality, bourgeois
independence, and bourgeois freedom is undoubtedly aimed at.

By freedom is meant, under the present bourgeois conditions of
production, free trade, free selling and buying.

But if selling and buying disappears, free selling and buying
disappears also.  This talk about free selling and buying, and
all the other "brave words" of our bourgeoisie about freedom in
general, have a meaning, if any, only in contrast with restricted
selling and buying, with the fettered traders of the Middle Ages,
but have no meaning when opposed to the Communistic abolition of
buying and selling, of the bourgeois conditions of production,
and of the bourgeoisie itself.

You are horrified at our intending to do away with private
property.  But in your existing society, private property is
already done away with for nine-tenths of the population; its
existence for the few is solely due to its non-existence in the
hands of those nine-tenths.  You reproach us, therefore, with
intending to do away with a form of property, the necessary
condition for whose existence is the non-existence of any
property for the immense majority of society.

In one word, you reproach us with intending to do away with your
property.  Precisely so; that is just what we intend.

From the moment when labour can no longer be converted into
capital, money, or rent, into a social power capable of being
monopolised, i.e., from the moment when individual property can
no longer be transformed into bourgeois property, into capital,
from that moment, you say individuality vanishes.

You must, therefore, confess that by "individual" you mean no
other person than the bourgeois, than the middle-class owner of
property.  This person must, indeed, be swept out of the way, and
made impossible.

Communism deprives no man of the power to appropriate the
products of society; all that it does is to deprive him of the
power to subjugate the labour of others by means of such
appropriation.

It has been objected that upon the abolition of private property
all work will cease, and universal laziness will overtake us.

According to this, bourgeois society ought long ago to have gone
to the dogs through sheer idleness; for those of its members who
work, acquire nothing, and those who acquire anything, do not
work. The whole of this objection is but another expression of
the tautology: that there can no longer be any wage-labour when
there is no longer any capital.

All objections urged against the Communistic mode of producing
and appropriating material products, have, in the same way,
been urged against the Communistic modes of producing and
appropriating intellectual products.  Just as, to the bourgeois,
the disappearance of class property is the disappearance of
production itself, so the disappearance of class culture is to
him identical with the disappearance of all culture.

That culture, the loss of which he laments, is, for the enormous
majority, a mere training to act as a machine.

But don't wrangle with us so long as you apply, to our intended
abolition of bourgeois property, the standard of your bourgeois
notions of freedom, culture, law, etc.  Your very ideas are but
the outgrowth of the conditions of your bourgeois production and
bourgeois property, just as your jurisprudence is but the will of
your class made into a law for all, a will, whose essential
character and direction are determined by the economical
conditions of existence of your class.

The selfish misconception that induces you to transform into
eternal laws of nature and of reason, the social forms
springing from your present mode of production and form of
property--historical relations that rise and disappear in the
progress of production--this misconception you share with every
ruling class that has preceded you.  What you see clearly in the
case of ancient property, what you admit in the case of feudal
property, you are of course forbidden to admit in the case of
your own bourgeois form of property.

Abolition of the family!  Even the most radical flare up at this
infamous proposal of the Communists.

On what foundation is the present family, the bourgeois family,
based?  On capital, on private gain.  In its completely developed
form this family exists only among the bourgeoisie.  But this
state of things finds its complement in the practical absence of
the family among the proletarians, and in public prostitution.

The bourgeois family will vanish as a matter of course when its
complement vanishes, and both will vanish with the vanishing of
capital.

Do you charge us with wanting to stop the exploitation of
children by their parents?  To this crime we plead guilty.

But, you will say, we destroy the most hallowed of relations,
when we replace home education by social.

And your education!  Is not that also social, and determined by the
social conditions under which you educate, by the intervention,
direct or indirect, of society, by means of schools, etc.?  The
Communists have not invented the intervention of society in
education; they do but seek to alter the character of that
intervention, and to rescue education from the influence of the
ruling class.

The bourgeois clap-trap about the family and education, about
the hallowed co-relation of parent and child, becomes all the
more disgusting, the more, by the action of Modern Industry, all
family ties among the proletarians are torn asunder, and their
children transformed into simple articles of commerce and
instruments of labour.

But you Communists would introduce community of women, screams
the whole bourgeoisie in chorus.

The bourgeois sees in his wife a mere instrument of production.
He hears that the instruments of production are to be exploited
in common, and, naturally, can come to no other conclusion than
that the lot of being common to all will likewise fall to the
women.

He has not even a suspicion that the real point is to do away
with the status of women as mere instruments of production.

For the rest, nothing is more ridiculous than the
virtuous indignation of our bourgeois at the community of women
which, they pretend, is to be openly and officially established
by the Communists.  The Communists have no need to introduce
community of women; it has existed almost from time immemorial.

Our bourgeois, not content with having the wives and daughters
of their proletarians at their disposal, not to speak of common
prostitutes, take the greatest pleasure in seducing each other's
wives.

Bourgeois marriage is in reality a system of wives in common
and thus, at the most, what the Communists might possibly
be reproached with, is that they desire to introduce, in
substitution for a hypocritically concealed, an openly legalised
community of women. For the rest, it is self-evident that the
abolition of the present system of production must bring with it
the abolition of the community of women springing from that
system, i.e., of prostitution both public and private.

The Communists are further reproached with desiring to abolish
countries and nationality.

The working men have no country.  We cannot take from them what
they have not got.  Since the proletariat must first of all
acquire political supremacy, must rise to be the leading class of
the nation, must constitute itself the nation, it is, so far,
itself national, though not in the bourgeois sense of the word.

National differences and antagonisms between peoples are daily
more and more vanishing, owing to the development of the
bourgeoisie, to freedom of commerce, to the world-market, to
uniformity in the mode of production and in the conditions of
life corresponding thereto.

The supremacy of the proletariat will cause them to vanish still
faster. United action, of the leading civilised countries at
least, is one of the first conditions for the emancipation of
the proletariat.

In proportion as the exploitation of one individual by another
is put an end to, the exploitation of one nation by another will
also be put an end to.  In proportion as the antagonism between
classes within the nation vanishes, the hostility of one nation
to another will come to an end.

The charges against Communism made from a religious, a
philosophical, and, generally, from an ideological standpoint,
are not deserving of serious examination.

Does it require deep intuition to comprehend that man's ideas,
views and conceptions, in one word, man's consciousness, changes
with every change in the conditions of his material existence, in
his social relations and in his social life?

What else does the history of ideas prove, than that
intellectual production changes its character in proportion as
material production is changed? The ruling ideas of each age
have ever been the ideas of its ruling class.

When people speak of ideas that revolutionise society, they do
but express the fact, that within the old society, the elements
of a new one have been created, and that the dissolution of the
old ideas keeps even pace with the dissolution of the old
conditions of existence.

When the ancient world was in its last throes, the ancient
religions were overcome by Christianity.  When Christian ideas
succumbed in the 18th century to rationalist ideas, feudal
society fought its death battle with the then revolutionary
bourgeoisie.  The ideas of religious liberty and freedom of
conscience merely gave expression to the sway of free competition
within the domain of knowledge.

"Undoubtedly," it will be said, "religious, moral, philosophical
and juridical ideas have been modified in the course of
historical development.  But religion, morality philosophy,
political science, and law, constantly survived this change."

"There are, besides, eternal truths, such as Freedom, Justice,
etc. that are common to all states of society. But Communism
abolishes eternal truths, it abolishes all religion, and all
morality, instead of constituting them on a new basis; it
therefore acts in contradiction to all past historical experience."

What does this accusation reduce itself to?  The history of
all past society has consisted in the development of class
antagonisms, antagonisms that assumed different forms at
different epochs.

But whatever form they may have taken, one fact is common to all
past ages, viz., the exploitation of one part of society by the
other. No wonder, then, that the social consciousness of past
ages, despite all the multiplicity and variety it displays,
moves within certain common forms, or general ideas, which
cannot completely vanish except with the total disappearance of
class antagonisms.

The Communist revolution is the most radical rupture with
traditional property relations; no wonder that its development
involves the most radical rupture with traditional ideas.

But let us have done with the bourgeois objections to Communism.

We have seen above, that the first step in the revolution by the
working class, is to raise the proletariat to the position of
ruling as to win the battle of democracy.

The proletariat will use its political supremacy to wrest, by
degrees, all capital from the bourgeoisie, to centralise all
instruments of production in the hands of the State, i.e., of the
proletariat organised as the ruling class; and to increase the
total of productive forces as rapidly as possible.

Of course, in the beginning, this cannot be effected except by
means of despotic inroads on the rights of property, and on
the conditions of bourgeois production; by means of measures,
therefore, which appear economically insufficient and untenable,
but which, in the course of the movement, outstrip themselves,
necessitate further inroads upon the old social order, and are
unavoidable as a means of entirely revolutionising the mode of
production.

These measures will of course be different in different
countries.

Nevertheless in the most advanced countries, the following will
be pretty generally applicable.

1.  Abolition of property in land and application of all rents
    of land to public purposes.

2.  A heavy progressive or graduated income tax.

3.  Abolition of all right of inheritance.

4.  Confiscation of the property of all emigrants and rebels.

5.  Centralisation of credit in the hands of the State, by means
    of a national bank with State capital and an exclusive
    monopoly.

6.  Centralisation of the means of communication and transport
    in the hands of the State.

7.  Extension of factories and instruments of production owned by
    the State; the bringing into cultivation of waste-lands, and
    the improvement of the soil generally in accordance with a
    common plan.

8.  Equal liability of all to labour.  Establishment of
    industrial armies, especially for agriculture.

9.  Combination of agriculture with manufacturing industries;
    gradual abolition of the distinction between town and
    country, by a more equable distribution of the population
    over the country.

10. Free education for all children in public schools.
    Abolition of children's factory labour in its present form.
    Combination of education with industrial production, &c., &c.

When, in the course of development, class distinctions have
disappeared, and all production has been concentrated in the
hands of a vast association of the whole nation, the public power
will lose its political character.  Political power, properly so
called, is merely the organised power of one class for oppressing
another.  If the proletariat during its contest with the
bourgeoisie is compelled, by the force of circumstances, to
organise itself as a class, if, by means of a revolution, it
makes itself the ruling class, and, as such, sweeps away by force
the old conditions of production, then it will, along with these
conditions, have swept away the conditions for the existence of
class antagonisms and of classes generally, and will thereby have
abolished its own supremacy as a class.

In place of the old bourgeois society, with its classes and
class antagonisms, we shall have an association, in which
the free development of each is the condition for the free
development of all.



III.  SOCIALIST AND COMMUNIST LITERATURE


1. REACTIONARY SOCIALISM


A. Feudal Socialism

Owing to their historical position, it became the vocation of the
aristocracies of France and England to write pamphlets against
modern bourgeois society.  In the French revolution of July 1830,
and in the English reform agitation, these aristocracies again
succumbed to the hateful upstart.  Thenceforth, a serious political
contest was altogether out of the question.  A literary battle
alone remained possible.  But even in the domain of literature
the old cries of the restoration period had become impossible.

In order to arouse sympathy, the aristocracy were obliged to
lose sight, apparently, of their own interests, and to formulate
their indictment against the bourgeoisie in the interest of the
exploited working class alone.  Thus the aristocracy took their
revenge by singing lampoons on their new master, and whispering
in his ears sinister prophecies of coming catastrophe.

In this way arose Feudal Socialism: half lamentation, half
lampoon; half echo of the past, half menace of the future; at
times, by its bitter, witty and incisive criticism, striking the
bourgeoisie to the very heart's core; but always ludicrous in
its effect, through total incapacity to comprehend the march of
modern history.

The aristocracy, in order to rally the people to them, waved the
proletarian alms-bag in front for a banner.  But the people, so
often as it joined them, saw on their hindquarters the old feudal
coats of arms, and deserted with loud and irreverent laughter.

One section of the French Legitimists and "Young England"
exhibited this spectacle.

In pointing out that their mode of exploitation was different to
that of the bourgeoisie, the feudalists forget that they
exploited under circumstances and conditions that were quite
different, and that are now antiquated.  In showing that, under
their rule, the modern proletariat never existed, they forget
that the modern bourgeoisie is the necessary offspring of their
own form of society.

For the rest, so little do they conceal the reactionary
character of their criticism that their chief accusation against
the bourgeoisie amounts to this, that under the bourgeois regime
a class is being developed, which is destined to cut up root and
branch the old order of society.

What they upbraid the bourgeoisie with is not so much that it
creates a proletariat, as that it creates a revolutionary
proletariat.

In political practice, therefore, they join in all coercive
measures against the working class; and in ordinary life,
despite their high falutin phrases, they stoop to pick up the
golden apples dropped from the tree of industry, and to barter
truth, love, and honour for traffic in wool, beetroot-sugar, and
potato spirits.

As the parson has ever gone hand in hand with the landlord,
so has Clerical Socialism with Feudal Socialism.

Nothing is easier than to give Christian asceticism a Socialist
tinge. Has not Christianity declaimed against private property,
against marriage, against the State? Has it not preached in the
place of these, charity and poverty, celibacy and mortification
of the flesh, monastic life and Mother Church? Christian
Socialism is but the holy, water with which the priest consecrates
the heart-burnings of the aristocrat.


B. Petty-Bourgeois Socialism

The feudal aristocracy was not the only class that was ruined by
the bourgeoisie, not the only class whose conditions of existence
pined and perished in the atmosphere of modern bourgeois society.
The mediaeval burgesses and the small peasant proprietors were
the precursors of the modern bourgeoisie.  In those countries
which are but little developed, industrially and commercially,
these two classes still vegetate side by side with the rising
bourgeoisie.

In countries where modern civilisation has become fully
developed, a new class of petty bourgeois has been formed,
fluctuating between proletariat and bourgeoisie and ever renewing
itself as a supplementary part of bourgeois society.  The
individual members of this class, however, are being constantly
hurled down into the proletariat by the action of competition,
and, as modern industry develops, they even see the moment
approaching when they will completely disappear as an independent
section of modern society, to be replaced, in manufactures,
agriculture and commerce, by overlookers, bailiffs and shopmen.

In countries like France, where the peasants constitute far more
than half of the population, it was natural that writers who
sided with the proletariat against the bourgeoisie, should use,
in their criticism of the bourgeois regime, the standard of the
peasant and petty bourgeois, and from the standpoint of these
intermediate classes should take up the cudgels for the working
class.  Thus arose petty-bourgeois Socialism.  Sismondi was the
head of this school, not only in France but also in England.

This school of Socialism dissected with great acuteness the
contradictions in the conditions of modern production.  It laid
bare the hypocritical apologies of economists.  It proved,
incontrovertibly, the disastrous effects of machinery and
division of labour; the concentration of capital and land in a
few hands; overproduction and crises; it pointed out the
inevitable ruin of the petty bourgeois and peasant, the misery
of the proletariat, the anarchy in production, the crying
inequalities in the distribution of wealth, the industrial war of
extermination between nations, the dissolution of old moral
bonds, of the old family relations, of the old nationalities.

In its positive aims, however, this form of Socialism aspires
either to restoring the old means of production and of exchange,
and with them the old property relations, and the old society, or
to cramping the modern means of production and of exchange,
within the framework of the old property relations that have
been, and were bound to be, exploded by those means.  In either
case, it is both reactionary and Utopian.

Its last words are: corporate guilds for manufacture,
patriarchal relations in agriculture.

Ultimately, when stubborn historical facts had dispersed all
intoxicating effects of self-deception, this form of Socialism
ended in a miserable fit of the blues.


C. German, or "True," Socialism

The Socialist and Communist literature of France, a literature
that originated under the pressure of a bourgeoisie in power, and
that was the expression of the struggle against this power, was
introduced into Germany at a time when the bourgeoisie, in that
country, had just begun its contest with feudal absolutism.

German philosophers, would-be philosophers, and beaux esprits,
eagerly seized on this literature, only forgetting, that when
these writings immigrated from France into Germany, French social
conditions had not immigrated along with them.  In contact with
German social conditions, this French literature lost all its
immediate practical significance, and assumed a purely literary
aspect.  Thus, to the German philosophers of the eighteenth
century, the demands of the first French Revolution were nothing
more than the demands of "Practical Reason" in general, and the
utterance of the will of the revolutionary French bourgeoisie
signified in their eyes the law of pure Will, of Will as it was
bound to be, of true human Will generally.

The world of the German literate consisted solely in bringing
the new French ideas into harmony with their ancient philosophical
conscience, or rather, in annexing the French ideas without
deserting their own philosophic point of view.

This annexation took place in the same way in which a foreign
language is appropriated, namely, by translation.

It is well known how the monks wrote silly lives of Catholic
Saints over the manuscripts on which the classical works of
ancient heathendom had been written.  The German literate
reversed this process with the profane French literature.  They
wrote their philosophical nonsense beneath the French original.
For instance, beneath the French criticism of the economic
functions of money, they wrote "Alienation of Humanity," and
beneath the French criticism of the bourgeois State they wrote
"dethronement of the Category of the General," and so forth.

The introduction of these philosophical phrases at the back of
the French historical criticisms they dubbed "Philosophy of
Action," "True Socialism," "German Science of Socialism,"
"Philosophical Foundation of Socialism," and so on.

The French Socialist and Communist literature was thus completely
emasculated. And, since it ceased in the hands of the German to express
the struggle of one class with the other, he felt conscious of having
overcome "French one-sidedness" and of representing, not true
requirements, but the requirements of truth; not the interests of the
proletariat, but the interests of Human Nature, of Man in general, who
belongs to no class, has no reality, who exists only in the misty realm
of philosophical fantasy.

This German Socialism, which took its schoolboy task so seriously
and solemnly, and extolled its poor stock-in-trade in such
mountebank fashion, meanwhile gradually lost its pedantic
innocence.

The fight of the German, and especially, of the Prussian bourgeoisie,
against feudal aristocracy and absolute monarchy, in other words, the
liberal movement, became more earnest.

By this, the long wished-for opportunity was offered to "True"
Socialism of confronting the political movement with the
Socialist demands, of hurling the traditional anathemas
against liberalism, against representative government, against
bourgeois competition, bourgeois freedom of the press, bourgeois
legislation, bourgeois liberty and equality, and of preaching to
the masses that they had nothing to gain, and everything to lose,
by this bourgeois movement.  German Socialism forgot, in the nick
of time, that the French criticism, whose silly echo it was,
presupposed the existence of modern bourgeois society, with its
corresponding economic conditions of existence, and the political
constitution adapted thereto, the very things whose attainment
was the object of the pending struggle in Germany.

To the absolute governments, with their following of parsons,
professors, country squires and officials, it served as a welcome
scarecrow against the threatening bourgeoisie.

It was a sweet finish after the bitter pills of floggings and
bullets with which these same governments, just at that time,
dosed the German working-class risings.

While this "True" Socialism thus served the governments as a
weapon for fighting the German bourgeoisie, it, at the same time,
directly represented a reactionary interest, the interest of the
German Philistines.  In Germany the petty-bourgeois class, a
relic of the sixteenth century, and since then constantly
cropping up again under various forms, is the real social basis
of the existing state of things.

To preserve this class is to preserve the existing state of
things in Germany.  The industrial and political supremacy of the
bourgeoisie threatens it with certain destruction; on the one
hand, from the concentration of capital; on the other, from the
rise of a revolutionary proletariat.  "True" Socialism appeared to
kill these two birds with one stone.  It spread like an epidemic.

The robe of speculative cobwebs, embroidered with flowers
of rhetoric, steeped in the dew of sickly sentiment, this
transcendental robe in which the German Socialists wrapped their
sorry "eternal truths," all skin and bone, served to wonderfully
increase the sale of their goods amongst such a public.  And on
its part, German Socialism recognised, more and more, its own
calling as the bombastic representative of the petty-bourgeois
Philistine.

It proclaimed the German nation to be the model nation, and the
German petty Philistine to be the typical man.  To every
villainous meanness of this model man it gave a hidden, higher,
Socialistic interpretation, the exact contrary of its real
character.  It went to the extreme length of directly opposing
the "brutally destructive" tendency of Communism, and of
proclaiming its supreme and impartial contempt of all class
struggles.  With very few exceptions, all the so-called Socialist
and Communist publications that now (1847) circulate in Germany
belong to the domain of this foul and enervating literature.


2. CONSERVATIVE, OR BOURGEOIS, SOCIALISM

A part of the bourgeoisie is desirous of redressing social
grievances, in order to secure the continued existence of
bourgeois society.

To this section belong economists, philanthropists,
humanitarians, improvers of the condition of the working class,
organisers of charity, members of societies for the prevention of
cruelty to animals, temperance fanatics, hole-and-corner
reformers of every imaginable kind.  This form of Socialism has,
moreover, been worked out into complete systems.

We may cite Proudhon's Philosophie de la Misere as an example of
this form.

The Socialistic bourgeois want all the advantages of modern
social conditions without the struggles and dangers necessarily
resulting therefrom.  They desire the existing state of society
minus its revolutionary and disintegrating elements.  They wish
for a bourgeoisie without a proletariat.  The bourgeoisie
naturally conceives the world in which it is supreme to be the
best; and bourgeois Socialism develops this comfortable
conception into various more or less complete systems.  In
requiring the proletariat to carry out such a system, and thereby
to march straightway into the social New Jerusalem, it but
requires in reality, that the proletariat should remain within
the bounds of existing society, but should cast away all its
hateful ideas concerning the bourgeoisie.

A second and more practical, but less systematic, form of this
Socialism sought to depreciate every revolutionary movement in
the eyes of the working class, by showing that no mere political
reform, but only a change in the material conditions of
existence, in economic relations, could be of any advantage to
them.  By changes in the material conditions of existence, this
form of Socialism, however, by no means understands abolition of
the bourgeois relations of production, an abolition that can be
effected only by a revolution, but administrative reforms, based
on the continued existence of these relations; reforms,
therefore, that in no respect affect the relations between
capital and labour, but, at the best, lessen the cost, and
simplify the administrative work, of bourgeois government.

Bourgeois Socialism attains adequate expression, when, and only
when, it becomes a mere figure of speech.

Free trade: for the benefit of the working class.  Protective
duties: for the benefit of the working class.  Prison Reform: for
the benefit of the working class.  This is the last word and the
only seriously meant word of bourgeois Socialism.

It is summed up in the phrase: the bourgeois is a bourgeois--for
the benefit of the working class.


3.  CRITICAL-UTOPIAN SOCIALISM AND COMMUNISM

We do not here refer to that literature which, in every great
modern revolution, has always given voice to the demands of the
proletariat, such as the writings of Babeuf and others.

The first direct attempts of the proletariat to attain its own
ends, made in times of universal excitement, when feudal society
was being overthrown, these attempts necessarily failed, owing
to the then undeveloped state of the proletariat, as well as to
the absence of the economic conditions for its emancipation,
conditions that had yet to be produced, and could be produced
by the impending bourgeois epoch alone. The revolutionary
literature that accompanied these first movements of the
proletariat had necessarily a reactionary character. It
inculcated universal asceticism and social levelling in its
crudest form.

The Socialist and Communist systems properly so called, those of
Saint-Simon, Fourier, Owen and others, spring into existence in
the early undeveloped period, described above, of the struggle
between proletariat and bourgeoisie (see Section 1. Bourgeois
and Proletarians).

The founders of these systems see, indeed, the class antagonisms, as
well as the action of the decomposing elements, in the prevailing form
of society. But the proletariat, as yet in its infancy, offers to them
the spectacle of a class without any historical initiative or any
independent political movement.

Since the development of class antagonism keeps even pace with
the development of industry, the economic situation, as they find
it, does not as yet offer to them the material conditions for the
emancipation of the proletariat.  They therefore search after a
new social science, after new social laws, that are to create
these conditions.

Historical action is to yield to their personal inventive
action, historically created conditions of emancipation to
fantastic ones, and the gradual, spontaneous class-organisation
of the proletariat to the organisation of society specially
contrived by these inventors.  Future history resolves itself, in
their eyes, into the propaganda and the practical carrying out of
their social plans.

In the formation of their plans they are conscious of caring
chiefly for the interests of the working class, as being the most
suffering class.  Only from the point of view of being the most
suffering class does the proletariat exist for them.

The undeveloped state of the class struggle, as well as their
own surroundings, causes Socialists of this kind to consider
themselves far superior to all class antagonisms.  They want to
improve the condition of every member of society, even that of
the most favoured.  Hence, they habitually appeal to society at
large, without  distinction of class; nay, by preference, to the
ruling class.  For how can people, when once they understand
their system, fail to see in it the best possible plan of the
best possible state of society?

Hence, they reject all political, and especially all
revolutionary, action; they wish to attain their ends by
peaceful means, and endeavour, by small experiments, necessarily
doomed to failure, and by the force of example, to pave the way
for the new social Gospel.

Such fantastic pictures of future society, painted at a time
when the proletariat is still in a very undeveloped state and has
but a fantastic conception of its own position correspond with
the first instinctive yearnings of that class for a general
reconstruction of society.

But these Socialist and Communist publications contain also a
critical element. They attack every principle of existing society.
Hence they are full of the most valuable materials for the
enlightenment of the working class. The practical measures
proposed in them--such as the abolition of the distinction
between town and country, of the family, of the carrying on of
industries for the account of private individuals, and of the wage
system, the proclamation of social harmony, the conversion of the
functions of the State into a mere superintendence of production,
all these proposals, point solely to the disappearance of class
antagonisms which were, at that time, only just cropping up, and
which, in these publications, are recognised in their earliest,
indistinct and undefined forms only. These proposals, therefore,
are of a purely Utopian character.

The significance of Critical-Utopian Socialism and Communism
bears an inverse relation to historical development.  In
proportion as the modern class struggle develops and takes
definite shape, this fantastic standing apart from the contest,
these fantastic attacks on it, lose all practical value and all
theoretical justification.  Therefore, although the originators
of these systems were, in many respects, revolutionary, their
disciples have, in every case, formed mere reactionary sects.
They hold fast by the original views of their masters, in
opposition to the progressive historical development of the
proletariat.  They, therefore, endeavour, and that consistently,
to deaden the class struggle and to reconcile the class antagonisms.
They still dream of experimental realisation of their social
Utopias, of founding isolated "phalansteres," of establishing
"Home Colonies,"  of setting up a "Little Icaria"--duodecimo
editions of the New Jerusalem--and to realise all these castles
in the air, they are compelled to appeal to the feelings and
purses of the bourgeois.  By degrees they sink into the category
of the reactionary conservative Socialists depicted above,
differing from these only by more systematic pedantry, and
by their fanatical and superstitious belief in the miraculous
effects of their social science.

They, therefore, violently oppose all political action on the
part of the working class; such action, according to them, can
only result from blind unbelief in the new Gospel.

The Owenites in England, and the Fourierists in France,
respectively, oppose the Chartists and the Reformistes.



IV.  POSITION OF THE COMMUNISTS IN RELATION TO THE
VARIOUS EXISTING OPPOSITION PARTIES

Section II has made clear the relations of the Communists to the
existing working-class parties, such as the Chartists in England
and the Agrarian Reformers in America.

The Communists fight for the attainment of the immediate aims,
for the enforcement of the momentary interests of the working
class; but in the movement of the present, they also represent
and take care of the future of that movement.  In France the
Communists ally themselves with the Social-Democrats, against the
conservative and radical bourgeoisie, reserving, however, the
right to take up a critical position in regard to phrases and
illusions traditionally handed down from the great Revolution.

In Switzerland they support the Radicals, without losing sight
of the fact that this party consists of antagonistic elements,
partly of Democratic Socialists, in the French sense, partly of
radical bourgeois.

In Poland they support the party that insists on an agrarian
revolution as the prime condition for national emancipation, that
party which fomented the insurrection of Cracow in 1846.

In Germany they fight with the bourgeoisie whenever it acts in a
revolutionary way, against the absolute monarchy, the feudal
squirearchy, and the petty bourgeoisie.

But they never cease, for a single instant, to instil into the
working class the clearest possible recognition of the hostile
antagonism between bourgeoisie and proletariat, in order that the
German workers may straightaway use, as so many weapons against
the bourgeoisie, the social and political conditions that the
bourgeoisie must necessarily introduce along with its supremacy,
and in order that, after the fall of the reactionary classes in
Germany, the fight against the bourgeoisie itself may immediately
begin.

The Communists turn their attention chiefly to Germany, because
that country is on the eve of a bourgeois revolution that
is bound to be carried out under more advanced conditions
of European civilisation, and with a much more developed
proletariat, than that of England was in the seventeenth, and of
France in the eighteenth century, and because the bourgeois
revolution in Germany will be but the prelude to an immediately
following proletarian revolution.

In short, the Communists everywhere support every revolutionary
movement against the existing social and political order of
things.

In all these movements they bring to the front, as the leading
question in each, the property question, no matter what its
degree of development at the time.

Finally, they labour everywhere for the union and agreement of
the democratic parties of all countries.

The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims.
They openly declare that their ends can be attained only by
the forcible overthrow of all existing social conditions.
Let the ruling classes tremble at a Communistic revolution.
The proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains.
They have a world to win.


           WORKING MEN OF ALL COUNTRIES, UNITE!








